JANUARY
CLARITY

January 1st
CONTROL AND CHOICE

{
        quote: "“The chief task in life is simply this: to identify and separate
matters so that I can say clearly to myself which are externals
not under my control, and which have to do with the choices I
actually control. Where then do I look for good and evil? Not to
uncontrollable externals, but within myself to the choices that
are my own . . .”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.5.4–5

The single most important practice in Stoic philosophy is
differentiating between what we can change and what we can’t.
What we have influence over and what we do not. A flight is delayed
because of weather—no amount of yelling at an airline representative
will end a storm. No amount of wishing will make you taller or shorter
or born in a different country. No matter how hard you try, you can’t
make someone like you. And on top of that, time spent hurling yourself
at these immovable objects is time not spent on the things we can
change.
The recovery community practices something called the Serenity
Prayer: “God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
the courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the
difference.” Addicts cannot change the abuse suffered in childhood.
They cannot undo the choices they have made or the hurt they have
caused. But they can change the future—through the power they have in
the present moment. As Epictetus said, they can control the choices they
make right now.
The same is true for us today. If we can focus on making clear what
parts of our day are within our control and what parts are not, we will not
only be happier, we will have a distinct advantage over other people who
fail to realize they are fighting an unwinnable battle.

January 2nd
EDUCATION IS FREEDOM

“What is the fruit of these teachings? Only the most beautiful
and proper harvest of the truly educated—tranquility,
fearlessness, and freedom. We should not trust the masses who
say only the free can be educated, but rather the lovers of
wisdom who say that only the educated are free.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.1.21–23a

Why did you pick up this book? Why pick up any book? Not to
seem smarter, not to pass time on the plane, not to hear what you
want to hear—there are plenty of easier choices than reading.
No, you picked up this book because you are learning how to live.
Because you want to be freer, fear less, and achieve a state of peace.
Education—reading and meditating on the wisdom of great minds—is
not to be done for its own sake. It has a purpose.
Remember that imperative on the days you start to feel distracted,
when watching television or having a snack seems like a better use of
your time than reading or studying philosophy. Knowledge—selfknowledge in particular—is freedom.

January 3rd
BE RUTHLESS TO THE THINGS THAT DON’T MATTER

“How many have laid waste to your life when you weren’t aware
of what you were losing, how much was wasted in pointless
grief, foolish joy, greedy desire, and social amusements—how
little of your own was left to you. You will realize you are
dying before your time!”
—SENECA, ON THE BREVITY OF LIFE, 3.3b

One of the hardest things to do in life is to say “No.” To invitations,
to requests, to obligations, to the stuff that everyone else is doing.
Even harder is saying no to certain time-consuming emotions: anger,
excitement, distraction, obsession, lust. None of these impulses feels like
a big deal by itself, but run amok, they become a commitment like
anything else.
If you’re not careful, these are precisely the impositions that will
overwhelm and consume your life. Do you ever wonder how you can get
some of your time back, how you can feel less busy? Start by learning
the power of “No!”—as in “No, thank you,” and “No, I’m not going to
get caught up in that,” and “No, I just can’t right now.” It may hurt some
feelings. It may turn people off. It may take some hard work.But the
more you say no to the things that don’t matter, the more you can say yes
to the things that do. This will let you live and enjoy your life—the life
that you want.

January 4th
THE BIG THREE

“All you need are these: certainty of judgment in the present
moment;
action for the common good in the present moment;
and an attitude of gratitude in the present moment for anything
that comes your way.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 9.6

Perception, Action, Will. Those are the three overlapping but critical
disciplines of Stoicism (as well as the organization of this book and
yearlong journey you’ve just begun). There’s more to the philosophy
certainly—and we could spend all day talking about the unique beliefs of
the various Stoics: “This is what Heraclitus thought . . .” “Zeno is from
Citium, a city in Cyprus, and he believed . . .” But would such facts
really help you day to day? What clarity does trivia provide?
Instead, the following little reminder sums up the three most essential
parts of Stoic philosophy worth carrying with you every day, into every
decision:
Control your perceptions.
Direct your actions properly.
Willingly accept what’s outside your control.
That’s all we need to do.

January 5th
CLARIFY YOUR INTENTIONS

“Let all your efforts be directed to something, let it keep that end
in view. It’s not activity that disturbs people, but false
conceptions of things that drive them mad.”
—SENECA, ON TRANQUILITY OF MIND, 12.5

Law 29 of The 48 Laws of Power is: Plan All The Way To The End.
Robert Greene writes, “By planning to the end you will not be
overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know when to stop. Gently
guide fortune and help determine the future by thinking far ahead.” The
second habit in The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People is: begin with an
end in mind.
Having an end in mind is no guarantee that you’ll reach it—no Stoic
would tolerate that assumption—but not having an end in mind is a
guarantee you won’t. To the Stoics, oiêsis (false conceptions) are
responsible not just for disturbances in the soul but for chaotic and
dysfunctional lives and operations. When your efforts are not directed at
a cause or a purpose, how will you know what to do day in and day out?
How will you know what to say no to and what to say yes to? How will
you know when you’ve had enough, when you’ve reached your goal,
when you’ve gotten off track, if you’ve never defined what those things
are?
The answer is that you cannot. And so you are driven into failure—or
worse, into madness by the oblivion of directionlessness.

January 6th
WHERE, WHO, WHAT, AND WHY

“A person who doesn’t know what the universe is, doesn’t know
where they are. A person who doesn’t know their purpose in
life doesn’t know who they are or what the universe is. A
person who doesn’t know any one of these things doesn’t know
why they are here. So what to make of people who seek or
avoid the praise of those who have no knowledge of where or
who they are?”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 8.52

The late comedian Mitch Hedberg had a funny story he told in his act.
Sitting down for an on-air interview, a radio DJ asked him, “So,
who are you?” In that moment, he had to think, Is this guy really deep or
did I drive to the wrong station?
How often are we asked a simple question like “Who are you?” or
“What do you do?” or “Where are you from?” Considering it a
superficial question—if we even consider it at all—we don’t bother with
more than a superficial answer.
But, gun to their head, most people couldn’t give much in the way of
a substantive answer. Could you? Have you taken the time to get clarity
about who you are and what you stand for? Or are you too busy chasing
unimportant things, mimicking the wrong influences, and following
disappointing or unfulfilling or nonexistent paths?

January 7th
SEVEN CLEAR FUNCTIONS OF THE MIND

“The proper work of the mind is the exercise of choice, refusal,
yearning, repulsion, preparation, purpose, and assent. What
then can pollute and clog the mind’s proper functioning?
Nothing but its own corrupt decisions.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.11.6–7

Let’s break down each one of those tasks:
Choice—to do and think right
Refusal—of temptation
Yearning—to be better
Repulsion—of negativity, of bad influences, of what isn’t true
Preparation—for what lies ahead or whatever may happen
Purpose—our guiding principle and highest priority
Assent—to be free of deception about what’s inside and outside our
control (and be ready to accept the latter)
This is what the mind is here to do. We must make sure that it does—
and see everything else as pollution or a corruption.

January 8th
SEEING OUR ADDICTIONS

“We must give up many things to which we are addicted,
considering them to be good. Otherwise, courage will vanish,
which should continually test itself. Greatness of soul will be
lost, which can’t stand out unless it disdains as petty what the
mob regards as most desirable.
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 74.12b–13

What we consider to be harmless indulgences can easily become
full-blown addictions. We start with coffee in the morning, and
soon enough we can’t start the day without it. We check our email
because it’s part of our job, and soon enough we feel the phantom buzz
of the phone in our pocket every few seconds. Soon enough, these
harmless habits are running our lives.
The little compulsions and drives we have not only chip away at our
freedom and sovereignty, they cloud our clarity. We think we’re in
control—but are we really? As one addict put it, addiction is when we’ve
“lost the freedom to abstain.” Let us reclaim that freedom.
What that addiction is for you can vary: Soda? Drugs? Complaining?
Gossip? The Internet? Biting your nails? But you must reclaim the
ability to abstain because within it is your clarity and self-control.

January 9th
WHAT WE CONTROL AND WHAT WE DON’T

“Some things are in our control, while others are not. We control
our opinion, choice, desire, aversion, and, in a word, everything
of our own doing. We don’t control our body, property,
reputation, position, and, in a word, everything not of our own
doing. Even more, the things in our control are by nature free,
unhindered, and unobstructed, while those not in our control
are weak, slavish, can be hindered, and are not our own.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 1.1–2

Today, you won’t control the external events that happen. Is that
scary? A little, but it’s balanced when we see that we can control
our opinion about those events. You decide whether they’re good or bad,
whether they’re fair or unfair. You don’t control the situation, but you
control what you think about it.
See how that works? Every single thing that is outside your control—
the outside world, other people, luck, karma, whatever—still presents a
corresponding area that is in your control. This alone gives us plenty to
manage, plenty of power.
Best of all, an honest understanding of what is within our control
provides real clarity about the world: all we have is our own mind.
Remember that today when you try to extend your reach outward—that
it’s much better and more appropriately directed inward.

January 10th
IF YOU WANT TO BE STEADY

“The essence of good is a certain kind of reasoned choice; just as
the essence of evil is another kind. What about externals, then?
They are only the raw material for our reasoned choice, which
finds its own good or evil in working with them. How will it
find the good? Not by marveling at the material! For if
judgments about the material are straight that makes our
choices good, but if those judgments are twisted, our choices
turn bad.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 1.29.1–3

The Stoics seek steadiness, stability, and tranquility—traits most of us
aspire to but seem to experience only fleetingly. How do they
accomplish this elusive goal? How does one embody eustatheia (the
word Arrian used to describe this teaching of Epictetus)?
Well, it’s not luck. It’s not by eliminating outside influences or
running away to quiet and solitude. Instead, it’s about filtering the
outside world through the straightener of our judgment. That’s what our
reason can do—it can take the crooked, confusing, and overwhelming
nature of external events and make them orderly.
However, if our judgments are crooked because we don’t use reason,
then everything that follows will be crooked, and we will lose our ability
to steady ourselves in the chaos and rush of life. If you want to be steady,
if you want clarity, proper judgment is the best way.

January 11th
IF YOU WANT TO BE UNSTEADY

“For if a person shifts their caution to their own reasoned choices
and the acts of those choices, they will at the same time gain
the will to avoid, but if they shift their caution away from their
own reasoned choices to things not under their control, seeking
to avoid what is controlled by others, they will then be agitated,
fearful, and unstable.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.1.12

The image of the Zen philosopher is the monk up in the green, quiet
hills, or in a beautiful temple on some rocky cliff. The Stoics are the
antithesis of this idea. Instead, they are the man in the marketplace, the
senator in the Forum, the brave wife waiting for her soldier to return
from battle, the sculptor busy in her studio. Still, the Stoic is equally at
peace.
Epictetus is reminding you that serenity and stability are results of
your choices and judgment, not your environment. If you seek to avoid
all disruptions to tranquility—other people, external events, stress—you
will never be successful. Your problems will follow you wherever you
run and hide. But if you seek to avoid the harmful and disruptive
judgments that cause those problems, then you will be stable and steady
wherever you happen to be.

January 12th
THE ONE PATH TO SERENITY

“Keep this thought at the ready at daybreak, and through the day
and night—there is only one path to happiness, and that is in
giving up all outside of your sphere of choice, regarding
nothing else as your possession, surrendering all else to God
and Fortune.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.4.39

This morning, remind yourself of what is in your control and what’s
not in your control. Remind yourself to focus on the former and not
the latter.
Before lunch, remind yourself that the only thing you truly possess is
your ability to make choices (and to use reason and judgment when
doing so). This is the only thing that can never be taken from you
completely.
In the afternoon, remind yourself that aside from the choices you
make, your fate is not entirely up to you. The world is spinning and we
spin along with it—whichever direction, good or bad.
In the evening, remind yourself again how much is outside of your
control and where your choices begin and end.
As you lie in bed, remember that sleep is a form of surrender and
trust and how easily it comes. And prepare to start the whole cycle over
again tomorrow.

January 13th
CIRCLE OF CONTROL

“We control our reasoned choice and all acts that depend on that
moral will. What’s not under our control are the body and any
of its parts, our possessions, parents, siblings, children, or
country—anything with which we might associate.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 1.22.10

This is important enough that it bears repeating: a wise person knows
what’s inside their circle of control and what is outside of it.
The good news is that it’s pretty easy to remember what is inside our
control. According to the Stoics, the circle of control contains just one
thing: YOUR MIND. That’s right, even your physical body isn’t
completely within the circle. After all, you could be struck with a
physical illness or impairment at any moment. You could be traveling in
a foreign country and be thrown in jail.
But this is all good news because it drastically reduces the amount of
things that you need to think about. There is clarity in simplicity. While
everyone else is running around with a list of responsibilities a mile long
—things they’re not actually responsible for—you’ve got just that oneitem list. You’ve got just one thing to manage: your choices, your will,
your mind.
So mind it.

January 14th
CUT THE STRINGS THAT PULL YOUR MIND

“Understand at last that you have something in you more
powerful and divine than what causes the bodily passions and
pulls you like a mere puppet. What thoughts now occupy my
mind? Is it not fear, suspicion, desire, or something like that?”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 12.19

Think of all the interests vying for a share of your wallet or for a
second of your attention. Food scientists are engineering products to
exploit your taste buds. Silicon Valley engineers are designing
applications as addictive as gambling. The media is manufacturing
stories to provoke outrage and anger.
These are just a small slice of the temptations and forces acting on us
—distracting us and pulling us away from the things that truly matter.
Marcus, thankfully, was not exposed to these extreme parts of our
modern culture. But he knew plenty of distracting sinkholes too: gossip,
the endless call of work, as well as fear, suspicion, lust. Every human
being is pulled by these internal and external forces that are increasingly
more powerful and harder to resist.
Philosophy is simply asking us to pay careful attention and to strive
to be more than a pawn. As Viktor Frankl puts it in The Will to Meaning,
“Man is pushed by drives but pulled by values.” These values and inner
awareness prevent us from being puppets. Sure, paying attention requires
work and awareness, but isn’t that better than being jerked about on a
string?

January 15th
PEACE IS IN STAYING THE COURSE

“Tranquility can’t be grasped except by those who have reached
an unwavering and firm power of judgment—the rest
constantly fall and rise in their decisions, wavering in a state of
alternately rejecting and accepting things. What is the cause of
this back and forth? It’s because nothing is clear and they rely
on the most uncertain guide—common opinion.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 95.57b–58a

In Seneca’s essay on tranquility, he uses the Greek word euthymia,
which he defines as “believing in yourself and trusting that you are on
the right path, and not being in doubt by following the myriad footpaths
of those wandering in every direction.” It is this state of mind, he says,
that produces tranquility.
Clarity of vision allows us to have this belief. That’s not to say we’re
always going to be 100 percent certain of everything, or that we even
should be. Rather, it’s that we can rest assured we’re heading generally
in the right direction—that we don’t need to constantly compare
ourselves with other people or change our mind every three seconds
based on new information.
Instead, tranquility and peace are found in identifying our path and in
sticking to it: staying the course—making adjustments here and there,
naturally—but ignoring the distracting sirens who beckon us to turn
toward the rocks.

January 16th
NEVER DO ANYTHING OUT OF HABIT

“So in the majority of other things, we address circumstances not
in accordance with the right assumptions, but mostly by
following wretched habit. Since all that I’ve said is the case, the
person in training must seek to rise above, so as to stop seeking
out pleasure and steering away from pain; to stop clinging to
living and abhorring death; and in the case of property and
money, to stop valuing receiving over giving.”
—MUSONIUS RUFUS, LECTURES, 6.25.5–11

A worker is asked: “Why did you do it this way?” The answer,

“Because that’s the way we’ve always done things.” The answer
frustrates every good boss and sets the mouth of every entrepreneur
watering. The worker has stopped thinking and is mindlessly operating
out of habit. The business is ripe for disruption by a competitor, and the
worker will probably get fired by any thinking boss.
We should apply the same ruthlessness to our own habits. In fact, we
are studying philosophy precisely to break ourselves of rote behavior.
Find what you do out of rote memory or routine. Ask yourself: Is this
really the best way to do it? Know why you do what you do—do it for
the right reasons.

January 17th
REBOOT THE REAL WORK

“I am your teacher and you are learning in my school. My aim is
to bring you to completion, unhindered, free from compulsive
behavior, unrestrained, without shame, free, flourishing, and
happy, looking to God in things great and small—your aim is to
learn and diligently practice all these things. Why then don’t
you complete the work, if you have the right aim and I have
both the right aim and right preparation? What is missing? . . .
The work is quite feasible, and is the only thing in our
power. . . . Let go of the past. We must only begin. Believe me
and you will see.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.19.29–34

Do you remember, in school or early in your life, being afraid to try
something because you feared you might fail at it? Most teenagers
choose to fool around rather than exert themselves. Halfhearted, lazy
effort gives them a ready-made excuse: “It doesn’t matter. I wasn’t even
trying.”
As we get older, failure is not so inconsequential anymore. What’s at
stake is not some arbitrary grade or intramural sports trophy, but the
quality of your life and your ability to deal with the world around you.
Don’t let that intimidate you, though. You have the best teachers in
the world: the wisest philosophers who ever lived. And not only are you
capable, the professor is asking for something very simple: just begin the
work. The rest follows.

January 18th
SEE THE WORLD LIKE A POET AND AN ARTIST

“Pass through this brief patch of time in harmony with nature,
and come to your final resting place gracefully, just as a ripened
olive might drop, praising the earth that nourished it and
grateful to the tree that gave it growth.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 4.48.2

There are some stunningly beautiful turns of phrase in Marcus’s
Meditations—a surprising treat considering the intended audience
(just himself). In one passage, he praises the “charm and allure” of
nature’s process, the “stalks of ripe grain bending low, the frowning
brow of the lion, the foam dripping from the boar’s mouth.” We should
thank private rhetoric teacher Marcus Cornelius Fronto for the imagery
in these vivid passages. Fronto, widely considered to be Rome’s best
orator besides Cicero, was chosen by Marcus’s adopted father to teach
Marcus to think and write and speak.
More than just pretty phrases, they gave him—and now us—a
powerful perspective on ordinary or seemingly unbeautiful events. It
takes an artist’s eye to see that the end of life is not unlike a ripe fruit
falling from its tree. It takes a poet to notice the way “baking bread splits
in places and those cracks, while not intended in the baker’s art, catch
our eye and serve to stir our appetite” and find a metaphor in them.
There is clarity (and joy) in seeing what others can’t see, in finding
grace and harmony in places others overlook. Isn’t that far better than
seeing the world as some dark place?

January 19th
WHEREVER YOU GO, THERE YOUR CHOICE IS

“A podium and a prison is each a place, one high and the other
low, but in either place your freedom of choice can be
maintained if you so wish.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.6.25

The Stoics all held vastly different stations in life. Some were rich,
some were born at the bottom of Rome’s rigid hierarchy. Some had
it easy, and others had it unimaginably hard. This is true for us as well—
we all come to philosophy from different backgrounds, and even within
our own lives we experience bouts of good fortune and bad fortune.
But in all circumstances—adversity or advantage—we really have
just one thing we need to do: focus on what is in our control as opposed
to what is not. Right now we might be laid low with struggles, whereas
just a few years ago we might have lived high on the hog, and in just a
few days we might be doing so well that success is actually a burden.
One thing will stay constant: our freedom of choice—both in the big
picture and small picture.
Ultimately, this is clarity. Whoever we are, wherever we are—what
matters is our choices. What are they? How will we evaluate them? How
will we make the most of them? Those are the questions life asks us,
regardless of our station. How will you answer?

January 20th
REIGNITE YOUR THOUGHTS

“Your principles can’t be extinguished unless you snuff out the
thoughts that feed them, for it’s continually in your power to
reignite new ones. . . . It’s possible to start living again! See
things anew as you once did—that is how to restart life!”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 7.2

Have you had a bad couple of weeks? Have you been drifting away
from the principles and beliefs that you hold dear? It’s perfectly
fine. It happens to all of us.
In fact, it probably happened to Marcus—that may be why he
scribbled this note to himself. Perhaps he’d been dealing with difficult
senators or having difficulties with his troubled son. Perhaps in these
scenarios he’d lost his temper, became depressed, or stopped checking in
with himself. Who wouldn’t?
But the reminder here is that no matter what happens, no matter how
disappointing our behavior has been in the past, the principles
themselves remain unchanged. We can return and embrace them at any
moment. What happened yesterday—what happened five minutes ago—
is the past. We can reignite and restart whenever we like.
Why not do it right now?

January 21st
A MORNING RITUAL

“Ask yourself the following first thing in the morning:
What am I lacking in attaining freedom from passion?
What for tranquility?
What am I? A mere body, estate-holder, or reputation? None of
these things.
What, then? A rational being.
What then is demanded of me? Meditate on your actions.
How did I steer away from serenity?
What did I do that was unfriendly, unsocial, or uncaring?
What did I fail to do in all these things?”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.6.34–35

Many successful people have a morning ritual. For some, it’s
meditation. For others, it’s exercise. For many, it’s journaling—
just a few pages where they write down their thoughts, fears, hopes. In
these cases, the point is not so much the activity itself as it is the
ritualized reflection. The idea is to take some time to look inward and
examine.
Taking that time is what Stoics advocated more than almost anything
else. We don’t know whether Marcus Aurelius wrote his Meditations in
the morning or at night, but we know he carved out moments of quiet
alone time—and that he wrote for himself, not for anyone else. If you’re
looking for a place to start your own ritual, you could do worse than
Marcus’s example and Epictetus’s checklist.
Every day, starting today, ask yourself these same tough questions.
Let philosophy and hard work guide you to better answers, one morning
at a time, over the course of a life.

January 22nd
THE DAY IN REVIEW

“I will keep constant watch over myself and—most usefully—
will put each day up for review. For this is what makes us evil
—that none of us looks back upon our own lives. We reflect
upon only that which we are about to do. And yet our plans for
the future descend from the past.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 83.2

In a letter to his older brother Novatus, Seneca describes a beneficial
exercise he borrowed from another prominent philosopher. At the end
of each day he would ask himself variations of the following questions:
What bad habit did I curb today? How am I better? Were my actions
just? How can I improve?
At the beginning or end of each day, the Stoic sits down with his
journal and reviews: what he did, what he thought, what could be
improved. It’s for this reason that Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations is a
somewhat inscrutable book—it was for personal clarity and not public
benefit. Writing down Stoic exercises was and is also a form of
practicing them, just as repeating a prayer or hymn might be.
Keep your own journal, whether it’s saved on a computer or in a little
notebook. Take time to consciously recall the events of the previous day.
Be unflinching in your assessments. Notice what contributed to your
happiness and what detracted from it. Write down what you’d like to
work on or quotes that you like. By making the effort to record such
thoughts, you’re less likely to forget them. An added bonus: you’ll have
a running tally to track your progress too.

January 23rd
THE TRUTH ABOUT MONEY

“Let’s pass over to the really rich—how often the occasions they
look just like the poor! When they travel abroad they must
restrict their baggage, and when haste is necessary, they dismiss
their entourage. And those who are in the army, how few of
their possessions they get to keep . . .”
—SENECA, ON CONSOLATION TO HELVIA, 12. 1.b–2

The author F. Scott Fitzgerald, who often glamorized the lifestyles of
the rich and famous in books like The Great Gatsby, opens one of
his short stories with the now classic lines: “Let me tell you about the
very rich. They are different from you and me.” A few years after this
story was published, his friend Ernest Hemingway teased Fitzgerald by
writing, “Yes, they have more money.”
That’s what Seneca is reminding us. As someone who was one of the
richest men in Rome, he knew firsthand that money only marginally
changes life. It doesn’t solve the problems that people without it seem to
think it will. In fact, no material possession will. External things can’t fix
internal issues.
We constantly forget this—and it causes us so much confusion and
pain. As Hemingway would later write of Fitzgerald, “He thought [the
rich] were a special glamorous race and when he found they weren’t it
wrecked him as much as any other thing that wrecked him.” Without a
change the same will be true for us.

January 24th
PUSH FOR DEEP UNDERSTANDING

“From Rusticus . . . I learned to read carefully and not be
satisfied with a rough understanding of the whole, and not to
agree too quickly with those who have a lot to say about
something.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 1.7.3

The first book of Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations begins with a
catalog of gratitude. He thanks, one by one, the leading influences
in his life. One of the people he thanks is Quintus Junius Rusticus, a
teacher who developed in his student a love of deep clarity and
understanding—a desire to not just stop at the surface when it comes to
learning.
It was also from Rusticus that Marcus was introduced to Epictetus. In
fact, Rusticus loaned Marcus his personal copy of Epictetus’s lectures.
Marcus clearly wasn’t satisfied with just getting the gist of these lectures
and didn’t simply accept them on his teacher’s recommendation. Paul
Johnson once joked that Edmund Wilson read books “as though the
author was on trial for his life.” That’s how Marcus read Epictetus—and
when the lessons passed muster, he absorbed them. They became part of
his DNA as a human being. He quoted them at length over the course of
his life, finding real clarity and strength in words, even amid the
immense luxury and power he would come to possess.
That’s the kind of deep reading and study we need to cultivate as
well, which is why we’re reading just one page a day instead of a chapter
at a time. So we can take the time to read attentively and deeply.

January 25th
THE ONLY PRIZE

“What’s left to be prized? This, I think—to limit our action or
inaction to only what’s in keeping with the needs of our own
preparation . . . it’s what the exertions of education and
teaching are all about—here is the thing to be prized! If you
hold this firmly, you’ll stop trying to get yourself all the other
things. . . . If you don’t, you won’t be free, self-sufficient, or
liberated from passion, but necessarily full of envy, jealousy,
and suspicion for any who have the power to take them, and
you’ll plot against those who do have what you prize. . . . But
by having some self-respect for your own mind and prizing it,
you will please yourself and be in better harmony with your
fellow human beings, and more in tune with the gods—praising
everything they have set in order and allotted you.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.16.2b–4a

Warren Buffett, whose net worth is approximately $65 billion, lives
in the same house he bought in 1958 for $31,500. John Urschel, a
lineman for the Baltimore Ravens, makes millions but manages to live
on $25,000 a year. San Antonio Spurs star Kawhi Leonard gets around in
the 1997 Chevy Tahoe he’s had since he was a teenager, even with a
contract worth some $94 million. Why? It’s not because these men are
cheap. It’s because the things that matter to them are cheap.
Neither Buffett nor Urschel nor Leonard ended up this way by
accident. Their lifestyle is the result of prioritizing. They cultivate
interests that are decidedly below their financial means, and as a result,
any income would allow them freedom to pursue the things they most
care about. It just happens that they became wealthy beyond any
expectation. This kind of clarity—about what they love most in the
world—means they can enjoy their lives. It means they’d still be happy
even if the markets were to turn or their careers were cut short by injury.

The more things we desire and the more we have to do to earn or
attain those achievements, the less we actually enjoy our lives—and the
less free we are.

January 26th
THE POWER OF A MANTRA

“Erase the false impressions from your mind by constantly
saying to yourself, I have it in my soul to keep out any evil,
desire or any kind of disturbance—instead, seeing the true
nature of things, I will give them only their due. Always
remember this power that nature gave you.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 8.29

Anyone who has taken a yoga class or been exposed to Hindu or
Buddhist thought has probably heard of the concept of a mantra. In
Sanskrit, it means “sacred utterance”—essentially a word, a phrase, a
thought, even a sound—intended to provide clarity or spiritual guidance.
A mantra can be especially helpful in the meditative process because it
allows us to block out everything else while we focus.
It’s fitting, then, that Marcus Aurelius would suggest this Stoic
mantra—a reminder or watch phrase to use when we feel false
impressions, distractions, or the crush of everyday life upon us. It says,
essentially, “I have the power within me to keep that out. I can see the
truth.”
Change the wording as you like. That part is up to you. But have a
mantra and use it to find the clarity you crave.

January 27th
THE THREE AREAS OF TRAINING

“There are three areas in which the person who would be wise
and good must be trained. The first has to do with desires and
aversions—that a person may never miss the mark in desires
nor fall into what repels them. The second has to do with
impulses to act and not to act—and more broadly, with duty—
that a person may act deliberately for good reasons and not
carelessly. The third has to do with freedom from deception and
composure and the whole area of judgment, the assent our mind
gives to its perceptions. Of these areas, the chief and most
urgent is the first which has to do with the passions, for strong
emotions arise only when we fail in our desires and aversions.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.2.1–3a

Today, let’s focus on the three areas of training that Epictetus laid out
for us.
First, we must consider what we should desire and what we should be
averse to. Why? So that we want what is good and avoid what is bad. It’s
not enough to just listen to your body—because our attractions often lead
us astray.
Next, we must examine our impulses to act—that is, our motivations.
Are we doing things for the right reasons? Or do we act because we
haven’t stopped to think? Or do we believe that we have to do
something?
Finally, there is our judgment. Our ability to see things clearly and
properly comes when we use our great gift from nature: reason.
These are three distinct areas of training, but in practice they are
inextricably intertwined. Our judgment affects what we desire, our
desires affect how we act, just as our judgment determines how we act.
But we can’t just expect this to happen. We must put real thought and

energy into each area of our lives. If we do, we’ll find real clarity and
success.

January 28th
WATCHING THE WISE

“Take a good hard look at people’s ruling principle, especially of
the wise, what they run away from and what they seek out.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 4.38

Seneca has said, “Without a ruler to do it against, you can’t make
crooked straight.” That is the role of wise people in our lives—to
serve as model and inspiration. To bounce our ideas off and test our
presumptions.
Who that person will be for you is up to you. Perhaps it’s your father
or your mother. Maybe it’s a philosopher or a writer or a thinker. Perhaps
WWJD (What would Jesus do?) is the right model for you.
But pick someone, watch what they do (and what they don’t do), and
do your best to do the same.

January 29th
KEEP IT SIMPLE

“At every moment keep a sturdy mind on the task at hand, as a
Roman and human being, doing it with strict and simple
dignity, affection, freedom, and justice—giving yourself a
break from all other considerations. You can do this if you
approach each task as if it is your last, giving up every
distraction, emotional subversion of reason, and all drama,
vanity, and complaint over your fair share. You can see how
mastery over a few things makes it possible to live an abundant
and devout life—for, if you keep watch over these things, the
gods won’t ask for more.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 2.5

Each day presents the chance to overthink things. What should I
wear? Do they like me? Am I eating well enough? What’s next for
me in life? Is my boss happy with my work?
Today, let’s focus just on what’s in front of us. We’ll follow the
dictum that New England Patriots coach Bill Belichick gives his players:
“Do your job.” Like a Roman, like a good soldier, like a master of our
craft. We don’t need to get lost in a thousand other distractions or in
other people’s business.
Marcus says to approach each task as if it were your last, because it
very well could be. And even if it isn’t, botching what’s right in front of
you doesn’t help anything. Find clarity in the simplicity of doing your
job today.

January 30th
YOU DON’T HAVE TO STAY ON TOP OF EVERYTHING

“If you wish to improve, be content to appear clueless or stupid
in extraneous matters—don’t wish to seem knowledgeable.
And if some regard you as important, distrust yourself.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 13a

One of the most powerful things you can do as a human being in our
hyperconnected, 24/7 media world is say: “I don’t know.” Or, more
provocatively: “I don’t care.” Most of society seems to have taken it as a
commandment that one must know about every single current event,
watch every episode of every critically acclaimed television series,
follow the news religiously, and present themselves to others as an
informed and worldly individual.
But where is the evidence that this is actually necessary? Is the
obligation enforced by the police? Or is it that you’re just afraid of
seeming silly at a dinner party? Yes, you owe it to your country and your
family to know generally about events that may directly affect them, but
that’s about all.
How much more time, energy, and pure brainpower would you have
available if you drastically cut your media consumption? How much
more rested and present would you feel if you were no longer excited
and outraged by every scandal, breaking story, and potential crisis (many
of which never come to pass anyway)?

January 31st
PHILOSOPHY AS MEDICINE OF THE SOUL

“Don’t return to philosophy as a task-master, but as patients seek
out relief in a treatment of sore eyes, or a dressing for a burn, or
from an ointment. Regarding it this way, you’ll obey reason
without putting it on display and rest easy in its care.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.9

The busier we get, the more we work and learn and read, the further
we may drift. We get in a rhythm. We’re making money, being
creative, and we’re stimulated and busy. It seems like everything is going
well. But we drift further and further from philosophy.
Eventually this neglect will contribute to a problem—the stress builds
up, our mind gets cloudy, we forget what’s important—and result in an
injury of some kind. When that happens, it’s important that we tap the
brakes—put aside all the momentum and the moment. Return to the
regimen and practices that we know are rooted in clarity, good judgment,
good principles, and good health.
Stoicism is designed to be medicine for the soul. It relieves us of the
vulnerabilities of modern life. It restores us with the vigor we need to
thrive in life. Check in with it today, and let it do its healing.

FEBRUARY
PASSIONS AND EMOTIONS

February 1st
FOR THE HOT-HEADED MAN

“Keep this thought handy when you feel a fit of rage coming on
—it isn’t manly to be enraged. Rather, gentleness and civility
are more human, and therefore manlier. A real man doesn’t
give way to anger and discontent, and such a person has
strength, courage, and endurance—unlike the angry and
complaining. The nearer a man comes to a calm mind, the
closer he is to strength.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 11.18.5b

Why do athletes talk trash to each other? Why do they deliberately
say offensive and nasty things to their competitors when the refs
aren’t looking? To provoke a reaction. Distracting and angering
opponents is an easy way to knock them off their game.
Try to remember that when you find yourself getting mad. Anger is
not impressive or tough—it’s a mistake. It’s weakness. Depending on
what you’re doing, it might even be a trap that someone laid for you.
Fans and opponents called boxer Joe Louis the “Ring Robot” because
he was utterly unemotional—his cold, calm demeanor was far more
terrifying than any crazed look or emotional outburst would have been.
Strength is the ability to maintain a hold of oneself. It’s being the
person who never gets mad, who cannot be rattled, because they are in
control of their passions—rather than controlled by their passions.

February 2nd
A PROPER FRAME OF MIND

“Frame your thoughts like this—you are an old person, you
won’t let yourself be enslaved by this any longer, no longer
pulled like a puppet by every impulse, and you’ll stop
complaining about your present fortune or dreading the future.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 2.2

We resent the person who comes in and tries to boss us around.
Don’t tell me how to dress, how to think, how to do my job, how to
live. This is because we are independent, self-sufficient people.
Or at least that’s what we tell ourselves.
Yet if someone says something we disagree with, something inside us
tells us we have to argue with them. If there’s a plate of cookies in front
of us, we have to eat them. If someone does something we dislike, we
have to get mad about it. When something bad happens, we have to be
sad, depressed, or worried. But if something good happens a few minutes
later, all of a sudden we’re happy, excited, and want more.
We would never let another person jerk us around the way we let our
impulses do. It’s time we start seeing it that way—that we’re not puppets
that can be made to dance this way or that way just because we feel like
it. We should be the ones in control, not our emotions, because we are
independent, self-sufficient people.

February 3rd
THE SOURCE OF YOUR ANXIETY

“When I see an anxious person, I ask myself, what do they want?
For if a person wasn’t wanting something outside of their own
control, why would they be stricken by anxiety?”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.13.1

The anxious father, worried about his children. What does he want? A
world that is always safe. A frenzied traveler—what does she want?
For the weather to hold and for traffic to part so she can make her flight.
A nervous investor? That the market will turn around and an investment
will pay off.
All of these scenarios hold the same thing in common. As Epictetus
says, it’s wanting something outside our control. Getting worked up,
getting excited, nervously pacing—these intense, pained, and anxious
moments show us at our most futile and servile. Staring at the clock, at
the ticker, at the next checkout lane over, at the sky—it’s as if we all
belong to a religious cult that believes the gods of fate will only give us
what we want if we sacrifice our peace of mind.
Today, when you find yourself getting anxious, ask yourself: Why are
my insides twisted into knots? Am I in control here or is my anxiety? And
most important: Is my anxiety doing me any good?

February 4th
ON BEING INVINCIBLE

“Who then is invincible? The one who cannot be upset by
anything outside their reasoned choice.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 1.18.21

Have you ever watched a seasoned pro handle the media? No
question is too tough, no tone too pointed or insulting. They parry
every blow with humor, poise, and patience. Even when stung or
provoked, they choose not to flinch or react. They’re able to do this not
only because of training and experience, but because they understand
that reacting emotionally will only make the situation worse. The media
is waiting for them to slip up or get upset, so to successfully navigate
press events they have internalized the importance of keeping themselves
under calm control.
It’s unlikely you’ll face a horde of probing reporters bombarding you
with insensitive questions today. But it might be helpful—whatever
stresses or frustrations or overload that do come your way—to picture
that image and use it as your model for dealing with them. Our reasoned
choice—our prohairesis, as the Stoics called it—is a kind of invincibility
that we can cultivate. We can shrug off hostile attacks and breeze
through pressure or problems. And, like our model, when we finish, we
can point back into the crowd and say, “Next!”

February 5th
STEADY YOUR IMPULSES

“Don’t be bounced around, but submit every impulse to the
claims of justice, and protect your clear conviction in every
appearance.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 4.22

Think of the manic people in your life. Not the ones suffering from an
unfortunate disorder, but the ones whose lives and choices are in
disorder. Everything is soaring highs or crushing lows; the day is either
amazing or awful. Aren’t those people exhausting? Don’t you wish they
just had a filter through which they could test the good impulses versus
the bad ones?
There is such a filter. Justice. Reason. Philosophy. If there’s a central
message of Stoic thought, it’s this: impulses of all kinds are going to
come, and your work is to control them, like bringing a dog to heel. Put
more simply: think before you act. Ask: Who is in control here? What
principles are guiding me?

February 6th
DON’T SEEK OUT STRIFE

“I don’t agree with those who plunge headlong into the middle
of the flood and who, accepting a turbulent life, struggle daily
in great spirit with difficult circumstances. The wise person will
endure that, but won’t choose it—choosing to be at peace,
rather than at war.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 28.7

It has become a cliché to quote Theodore Roosevelt’s “Man in the
Arena” speech, which lionizes “the one whose face is marred by dust
and sweat and blood; who strives valiantly . . .” compared with the critic
who sits on the sidelines. Roosevelt gave that speech shortly after he left
office, at the height of his popularity. In a few years, he would run
against his former protégé in an attempt to retake the White House,
losing badly and nearly assassinated in the process. He would also nearly
die exploring a river in the Amazon, kill thousands of animals in African
safaris, and then beg Woodrow Wilson to allow him to enlist in World
War I despite being 59 years old. He would do a lot of things that seem
somewhat baffling in retrospect.
Theodore Roosevelt was a truly great man. But he was also driven by
a compulsion, a work and activity addiction that was seemingly without
end. Many of us share this affliction—being driven by something we
can’t control. We’re afraid of being still, so we seek out strife and action
as a distraction. We choose to be at war—in some cases, literally—when
peace is in fact the more honorable and fitting choice.
Yes, the man in the arena is admirable. As is the soldier and the
politician and the businesswoman and all the other occupations. But, and
this is a big but, only if we’re in the arena for the right reasons.

February 7th
FEAR IS A SELF-FULFILLING PROPHECY

“Many are harmed by fear itself, and many may have come to
their fate while dreading fate.”
—SENECA, OEDIPUS, 992

“Only the paranoid survive,” Andy Grove, a former CEO of Intel,
famously said. It might be true. But we also know that the
paranoid often destroy themselves quicker and more spectacularly than
any enemy. Seneca, with his access and insight into the most powerful
elite in Rome, would have seen this dynamic play out quite vividly.
Nero, the student whose excesses Seneca tried to curb, killed not only his
own mother and wife but eventually turned on Seneca, his mentor, too.
The combination of power, fear, and mania can be deadly. The leader,
convinced that he might be betrayed, acts first and betrays others first.
Afraid that he’s not well liked, he works so hard to get others to like him
that it has the opposite effect. Convinced of mismanagement, he
micromanages and becomes the source of the mismanagement. And on
and on—the things we fear or dread, we blindly inflict on ourselves.
The next time you are afraid of some supposedly disastrous outcome,
remember that if you don’t control your impulses, if you lose your selfcontrol, you may be the very source of the disaster you so fear. It has
happened to smarter and more powerful and more successful people. It
can happen to us too.

February 8th
DID THAT MAKE YOU FEEL BETTER?

“You cry, I’m suffering severe pain! Are you then relieved from
feeling it, if you bear it in an unmanly way?”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 78.17

The next time someone gets upset near you—crying, yelling,
breaking something, being pointed or cruel—watch how quickly
this statement will stop them cold: “I hope this is making you feel
better.” Because, of course, it isn’t. Only in the bubble of extreme
emotion can we justify any of that kind of behavior—and when called to
account for it, we usually feel sheepish or embarrassed.
It’s worth applying that standard to yourself. The next time you find
yourself in the middle of a freakout, or moaning and groaning with
flulike symptoms, or crying tears of regret, just ask: Is this actually
making me feel better? Is this actually relieving any of the symptoms I
wish were gone?

February 9th
YOU DON’T HAVE TO HAVE AN OPINION

“We have the power to hold no opinion about a thing and to not
let it upset our state of mind—for things have no natural power
to shape our judgments.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.52

Here’s a funny exercise: think about all the upsetting things you don’t
know about—stuff people might have said about you behind your
back, mistakes you might have made that never came to your attention,
things you dropped or lost without even realizing it. What’s your
reaction? You don’t have one because you don’t know about it.
In other words, it is possible to hold no opinion about a negative
thing. You just need to cultivate that power instead of wielding it
accidentally. Especially when having an opinion is likely to make us
aggravated. Practice the ability of having absolutely no thoughts about
something—act as if you had no idea it ever occurred. Or that you’ve
never heard of it before. Let it become irrelevant or nonexistent to you.
It’ll be a lot less powerful this way.

February 10th
ANGER IS BAD FUEL

“There is no more stupefying thing than anger, nothing more
bent on its own strength. If successful, none more arrogant, if
foiled, none more insane—since it’s not driven back by
weariness even in defeat, when fortune removes its adversary it
turns its teeth on itself.”
—SENECA, ON ANGER, 3.1.5

As the Stoics have said many times, getting angry almost never
solves anything. Usually, it makes things worse. We get upset, then
the other person gets upset—now everyone is upset, and the problem is
no closer to getting solved.
Many successful people will try to tell you that anger is a powerful
fuel in their lives. The desire to “prove them all wrong” or “shove it in
their faces” has made many a millionaire. The anger at being called fat or
stupid has created fine physical specimens and brilliant minds. The anger
at being rejected has motivated many to carve their own path.
But that’s shortsighted. Such stories ignore the pollution produced as
a side effect and the wear and tear it put on the engine. It ignores what
happens when that initial anger runs out—and how now more and more
must be generated to keep the machine going (until, eventually, the only
source left is anger at oneself). “Hate is too great a burden to bear,”
Martin Luther King Jr. warned his fellow civil rights leaders in 1967,
even though they had every reason to respond to hate with hate.
The same is true for anger—in fact, it’s true for most extreme
emotions. They are toxic fuel. There’s plenty of it out in the world, no
question, but never worth the costs that come along with it.

February 11th
HERO OR NERO?

“Our soul is sometimes a king, and sometimes a tyrant. A king,
by attending to what is honorable, protects the good health of
the body in its care, and gives it no base or sordid command.
But an uncontrolled, desire-fueled, over-indulged soul is turned
from a king into that most feared and detested thing—a tyrant.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 114.24

There is that saying that absolute power corrupts absolutely. At first
glance, that’s true. Seneca’s pupil Nero and his litany of crimes and
murders is a perfect example. Another emperor, Domitian, arbitrarily
banished all philosophers from Rome (Epictetus was forced to flee as a
result). Many of Rome’s emperors were tyrants. Yet, not many years
later, Epictetus would become a close friend of another emperor,
Hadrian, who would help Marcus Aurelius to the throne, one of the truest
examples of a wise philosopher king.
So it’s not so clear that power always corrupts. In fact, it looks like it
comes down, in many ways, to the inner strength and self-awareness of
individuals—what they value, what desires they keep in check, whether
their understanding of fairness and justice can counteract the temptations
of unlimited wealth and deference.
The same is true for you. Both personally and professionally. Tyrant
or king? Hero or Nero? Which will you be?

February 12th
PROTECT YOUR PEACE OF MIND

“Keep constant guard over your perceptions, for it is no small
thing you are protecting, but your respect, trustworthiness and
steadiness, peace of mind, freedom from pain and fear, in a
word your freedom. For what would you sell these things?”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.3.6b–8

The dysfunctional job that stresses you out, a contentious
relationship, life in the spotlight. Stoicism, because it helps us
manage and think through our emotional reactions, can make these kinds
of situations easier to bear. It can help you manage and mitigate the
triggers that seem to be so constantly tripped.
But here’s a question: Why are you subjecting yourself to this? Is this
really the environment you were made for? To be provoked by nasty
emails and an endless parade of workplace problems? Our adrenal glands
can handle only so much before they become exhausted. Shouldn’t you
preserve them for life-and-death situations?
So yes, use Stoicism to manage these difficulties. But don’t forget to
ask: Is this really the life I want? Every time you get upset, a little bit of
life leaves the body. Are these really the things on which you want to
spend that priceless resource? Don’t be afraid to make a change—a big
one.

February 13th
PLEASURE CAN BECOME PUNISHMENT

“Whenever you get an impression of some pleasure, as with any
impression, guard yourself from being carried away by it, let it
await your action, give yourself a pause. After that, bring to
mind both times, first when you have enjoyed the pleasure and
later when you will regret it and hate yourself. Then compare to
those the joy and satisfaction you’d feel for abstaining
altogether. However, if a seemingly appropriate time arises to
act on it, don’t be overcome by its comfort, pleasantness, and
allure—but against all of this, how much better the
consciousness of conquering it.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 34

Self-control is a difficult thing, no question. Which is why a popular
trick from dieting might be helpful. Some diets allow a “cheat
day”—one day per week in which dieters can eat anything and
everything they want. Indeed, they’re encouraged to write a list during
the week of all the foods they craved so they can enjoy them all at once
as a treat (the thinking being that if you’re eating healthy six out of seven
days, you’re still ahead).
At first, this sounds like a dream, but anyone who has actually done
this knows the truth: each cheat day you eat yourself sick and hate
yourself afterward. Soon enough, you’re willingly abstaining from
cheating at all. Because you don’t need it, and you definitely don’t want
it. It’s not unlike a parent catching her child with cigarettes and forcing
him to smoke the whole pack.
It’s important to connect the so-called temptation with its actual
effects. Once you understand that indulging might actually be worse than
resisting, the urge begins to lose its appeal. In this way, self-control
becomes the real pleasure, and the temptation becomes the regret.

February 14th
THINK BEFORE YOU ACT

“For to be wise is only one thing—to fix our attention on our
intelligence, which guides all things everywhere.”
—HERACLITUS, QUOTED IN DIOGENES LAERTIUS, LIVES OF THE EMINENT PHILOSOPHERS, 9.1

Why did I do that? you’ve probably asked yourself. We all have.
How could I have been so stupid? What was I thinking?
You weren’t. That’s the problem. Within that head of yours is all the
reason and intelligence you need. It’s making sure that it’s deferred to
and utilized that’s the tough part. It’s making sure that your mind is in
charge, not your emotions, not your immediate physical sensations, not
your surging hormones.
Fix your attention on your intelligence. Let it do its thing.

February 15th
ONLY BAD DREAMS

“Clear your mind and get a hold on yourself and, as when
awakened from sleep and realizing it was only a bad dream
upsetting you, wake up and see that what’s there is just like
those dreams.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.31

The author Raymond Chandler was describing most of us when he
wrote in a letter to his publisher, “I never looked back, although I
had many uneasy periods looking forward.” Thomas Jefferson once
joked in a letter to John Adams, “How much pain have cost us the evils
which have never happened!” And Seneca would put it best: “There is
nothing so certain in our fears that’s not yet more certain in the fact that
most of what we dread comes to nothing.”
Many of the things that upset us, the Stoics believed, are a product of
the imagination, not reality. Like dreams, they are vivid and realistic at
the time but preposterous once we come out of it. In a dream, we never
stop to think and say: “Does this make any sense?” No, we go along with
it. The same goes with our flights of anger or fear or other extreme
emotions.
Getting upset is like continuing the dream while you’re awake. The
thing that provoked you wasn’t real—but your reaction was. And so
from the fake comes real consequences. Which is why you need to wake
up right now instead of creating a nightmare.

February 16th
DON’T MAKE THINGS HARDER THAN THEY NEED TO BE

“If someone asks you how to write your name, would you bark
out each letter? And if they get angry, would you then return
the anger? Wouldn’t you rather gently spell out each letter for
them? So then, remember in life that your duties are the sum of
individual acts. Pay attention to each of these as you do your
duty . . . just methodically complete your task.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.26

Here’s a common scenario. You’re working with a frustrating
coworker or a difficult boss. They ask you to do something and,
because you dislike the messenger, you immediately object. There’s this
problem or that one, or their request is obnoxious and rude. So you tell
them, “No, I’m not going to do it.” Then they retaliate by not doing
something that you had previously asked of them. And so the conflict
escalates.
Meanwhile, if you could step back and see it objectively, you’d
probably see that not everything they’re asking for is unreasonable. In
fact, some of it is pretty easy to do or is, at least, agreeable. And if you
did it, it might make the rest of the tasks a bit more tolerable too. Pretty
soon, you’ve done the entire thing.
Life (and our job) is difficult enough. Let’s not make it harder by
getting emotional about insignificant matters or digging in for battles we
don’t actually care about. Let’s not let emotion get in the way of
kathêkon, the simple, appropriate actions on the path to virtue.

February 17th
THE ENEMY OF HAPPINESS

“It is quite impossible to unite happiness with a yearning for
what we don’t have. Happiness has all that it wants, and
resembling the well-fed, there shouldn’t be hunger or thirst.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.24.17

I’ll be happy when I graduate, we tell ourselves. I’ll be happy when I
get this promotion, when this diet pays off, when I have the money that
my parents never had. Conditional happiness is what psychologists call
this kind of thinking. Like the horizon, you can walk for miles and miles
and never reach it. You won’t even get any closer.
Eagerly anticipating some future event, passionately imagining
something you desire, looking forward to some happy scenario—as
pleasurable as these activities might seem, they ruin your chance at
happiness here and now. Locate that yearning for more, better, someday
and see it for what it is: the enemy of your contentment. Choose it or
your happiness. As Epictetus says, the two are not compatible.

February 18th
PREPARE FOR THE STORM

“This is the true athlete—the person in rigorous training against
false impressions. Remain firm, you who suffer, don’t be
kidnapped by your impressions! The struggle is great, the task
divine—to gain mastery, freedom, happiness, and tranquility.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.18.27–28

Epictetus also used the metaphor of a storm, saying that our
impressions are not unlike extreme weather that can catch us and
whirl us about. When we get worked up or passionate about an issue, we
can relate.
But let’s think about the role of the weather in modern times. Today,
we have forecasters and experts who can fairly accurately predict storm
patterns. Today, we’re defenseless against a hurricane only if we refuse
to prepare or heed the warnings.
If we don’t have a plan, if we never learned how to put up the storm
windows, we will be at the mercy of these external—and internal—
elements. We’re still puny human beings compared with one-hundredmile-per-hour winds, but we have the advantage of being able to prepare
—being able to struggle against them in a new way.

February 19th
THE BANQUET OF LIFE

“Remember to conduct yourself in life as if at a banquet. As
something being passed around comes to you, reach out your
hand and take a moderate helping. Does it pass you by? Don’t
stop it. It hasn’t yet come? Don’t burn in desire for it, but wait
until it arrives in front of you. Act this way with children, a
spouse, toward position, with wealth—one day it will make you
worthy of a banquet with the gods.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 15

The next time you see something you want, remember Epictetus’s
metaphor of life’s banquet. As you find yourself getting excited,
ready to do anything and everything to get it—the equivalent of reaching
across the table and grabbing a dish out of someone’s hands—just
remind yourself: that’s bad manners and unnecessary. Then wait
patiently for your turn.
This metaphor has other interpretations too. For instance, we might
reflect that we’re lucky to have been invited to such a wonderful feast
(gratitude). Or that we should take our time and savor the taste of what’s
on offer (enjoying the present moment) but that to stuff ourselves sick
with food and drink serves no one, least of all our health (gluttony is a
deadly sin, after all). That at the end of the meal, it’s rude not to help the
host clean up and do the dishes (selflessness). And finally, that next time,
it’s our turn to host and treat others just as we had been treated (charity).
Enjoy the meal!

February 20th
THE GRAND PARADE OF DESIRE

“Robbers, perverts, killers, and tyrants—gather for your
inspection their so-called pleasures!”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.34

It’s never great to judge other people, but it’s worth taking a second to
investigate how a life dedicated to indulging every whim actually
works out. The writer Anne Lamott jokes in Bird by Bird, “Ever wonder
what God thinks of money? Just look at the people he gives it to.” The
same goes for pleasure. Look at the dictator and his harem filled with
plotting, manipulative mistresses. Look how quickly the partying of a
young starlet turns to drug addiction and a stalled career.
Ask yourself: Is that really worth it? Is it really that pleasurable?
Consider that when you crave something or contemplate indulging in
a “harmless” vice.

February 21st
WISH NOT, WANT NOT

“Remember that it’s not only the desire for wealth and position
that debases and subjugates us, but also the desire for peace,
leisure, travel, and learning. It doesn’t matter what the external
thing is, the value we place on it subjugates us to another . . .
where our heart is set, there our impediment lies.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.4.1–2; 15

Surely, Epictetus isn’t saying that peace, leisure, travel, and learning
are bad, is he? Thankfully, no. But ceaseless, ardent desire—if not
bad in and of itself—is fraught with potential complications. What we
desire makes us vulnerable. Whether it’s an opportunity to travel the
world or to be the president or for five minutes of peace and quiet, when
we pine for something, when we hope against hope, we set ourselves up
for disappointment. Because fate can always intervene and then we’ll
likely lose our self-control in response.
As Diogenes, the famous Cynic, once said, “It is the privilege of the
gods to want nothing, and of godlike men to want little.” To want
nothing makes one invincible—because nothing lies outside your
control. This doesn’t just go for not wanting the easy-to-criticize things
like wealth or fame—the kinds of folly that we see illustrated in some of
our most classic plays and fables. That green light that Gatsby strove for
can represent seemingly good things too, like love or a noble cause. But
it can wreck someone all the same.
When it comes to your goals and the things you strive for, ask
yourself: Am I in control of them or they in control of me?

February 22nd
WHAT’S BETTER LEFT UNSAID

“Cato practiced the kind of public speech capable of moving the
masses, believing proper political philosophy takes care like
any great city to maintain the warlike element. But he was
never seen practicing in front of others, and no one ever heard
him rehearse a speech. When he was told that people blamed
him for his silence, he replied, ‘Better they not blame my life. I
begin to speak only when I’m certain what I’ll say isn’t better
left unsaid.’”
—PLUTARCH, CATO THE YOUNGER, 4

It’s easy to act—to just dive in. It’s harder to stop, to pause, to think:
No, I’m not sure I need to do that yet. I’m not sure I am ready. As
Cato entered politics, many expected swift and great things from him—
stirring speeches, roaring condemnations, wise analyses. He was aware
of this pressure—a pressure that exists on all of us at all times—and
resisted. It’s easy to pander to the mob (and to our ego).
Instead, he waited and prepared. He parsed his own thoughts, made
sure he was not reacting emotionally, selfishly, ignorantly, or
prematurely. Only then would he speak—when he was confident that his
words were worthy of being heard.
To do this requires awareness. It requires us to stop and evaluate
ourselves honestly. Can you do that?

February 23rd
CIRCUMSTANCES HAVE NO CARE FOR OUR FEELINGS

“You shouldn’t give circumstances the power to rouse anger, for
they don’t care at all.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 7.38

significant chunk of Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations is made up of
A short quotes and passages from other writers. This is because Marcus
wasn’t necessarily trying to produce an original work—instead he was
practicing, reminding himself here and there of important lessons, and
sometimes these lessons were things he had read.
This particular quote is special because it comes from a play by
Euripides, which, except for a handful of quoted fragments like this, is
lost to us. From what we can gather about the play, Bellerophon, the
hero, comes to doubt the existence of the gods. But in this line, he is
saying: Why bother getting mad at causes and forces far bigger than us?
Why do we take these things personally? After all, external events are
not sentient beings—they cannot respond to our shouts and cries—and
neither can the mostly indifferent gods.
That’s what Marcus was reminding himself of here: circumstances
are incapable of considering or caring for your feelings, your anxiety, or
your excitement. They don’t care about your reaction. They are not
people. So stop acting like getting worked up is having an impact on a
given situation. Situations don’t care at all.

February 24th
THE REAL SOURCE OF HARM

“Keep in mind that it isn’t the one who has it in for you and
takes a swipe that harms you, but rather the harm comes from
your own belief about the abuse. So when someone arouses
your anger, know that it’s really your own opinion fueling it.
Instead, make it your first response not to be carried away by
such impressions, for with time and distance self-mastery is
more easily achieved.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 20

The Stoics remind us that there really is no such thing as an
objectively good or bad occurrence. When a billionaire loses $1
million in market fluctuation, it’s not the same as when you or I lose a
million dollars. Criticism from your worst enemy is received differently
than negative words from a spouse. If someone sends you an angry email
but you never see it, did it actually happen? In other words, these
situations require our participation, context, and categorization in order
to be “bad.”
Our reaction is what actually decides whether harm has occurred. If
we feel that we’ve been wronged and get angry, of course that’s how it
will seem. If we raise our voice because we feel we’re being confronted,
naturally a confrontation will ensue.
But if we retain control of ourselves, we decide whether to label
something good or bad. In fact, if that same event happened to us at
different points in our lifetime, we might have very different reactions.
So why not choose now to not apply these labels? Why not choose not to
react?

February 25th
THE SMOKE AND DUST OF MYTH

“Keep a list before your mind of those who burned with anger
and resentment about something, of even the most renowned
for success, misfortune, evil deeds, or any special distinction.
Then ask yourself, how did that work out? Smoke and dust, the
stuff of simple myth trying to be legend . . .”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 12.27

In Marcus Aurelius’s writings, he constantly points out how the
emperors who came before him were barely remembered just a few
years later. To him, this was a reminder that no matter how much he
conquered, no matter how much he inflicted his will on the world, it
would be like building a castle in the sand—soon to be erased by the
winds of time.
The same goes for those driven to the heights of hate or anger or
obsession or perfectionism. Marcus liked to point out that Alexander the
Great—one of the most passionate and ambitious men who ever lived—
was buried in the same ground as his mule driver. Eventually, all of us
will pass away and slowly be forgotten. We should enjoy this brief time
we have on earth—not be enslaved to emotions that make us miserable
and dissatisfied.

February 26th
TO EACH HIS OWN

“Another has done me wrong? Let him see to it. He has his own
tendencies, and his own affairs. What I have now is what the
common nature has willed, and what I endeavor to accomplish
now is what my nature wills.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.25

Abraham Lincoln occasionally got fuming mad with a subordinate,
one of his generals, even a friend. Rather than taking it out on that
person directly, he’d write a long letter, outlining his case why they were
wrong and what he wanted them to know. Then Lincoln would fold it up,
put the letter in the desk drawer, and never send it. Many of these letters
survive only by chance.
He knew, as the former emperor of Rome knew, that it’s easy to fight
back. It’s tempting to give them a piece of your mind. But you almost
always end up with regret. You almost always wish you hadn’t sent the
letter. Think of the last time you flew off the handle. What was the
outcome? Was there any benefit?

February 27th
CULTIVATING INDIFFERENCE WHERE OTHERS GROW
PASSION

“Of all the things that are, some are good, others bad, and yet
others indifferent. The good are virtues and all that share in
them; the bad are the vices and all that indulge them; the
indifferent lie in between virtue and vice and include wealth,
health, life, death, pleasure, and pain.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.19.12b–13

Imagine the power you’d have in your life and relationships if all the
things that trouble everyone else—how thin they are, how much
money they have, how long they have left to live, how they will die—
didn’t matter so much. What if, where others were upset, envious,
excited, possessive, or greedy, you were objective, calm, and
clearheaded? Can you envision that? Imagine what it would do for your
relationships at work, or for your love life, or your friendships.
Seneca was an incredibly wealthy, even famous, man—yet he was a
Stoic. He had many material things, yet, as the Stoics say, he was also
indifferent to them. He enjoyed them while they were there, but he
accepted that they might someday disappear. What a better attitude than
desperately craving more or fearfully dreading losing even one penny.
Indifference is solid middle ground.
It’s not about avoidance or shunning, but rather not giving any
possible outcome more power or preference than is appropriate. This not
easy to do, certainly, but if you could manage, how much more relaxed
would you be?

February 28th
WHEN YOU LOSE CONTROL

“The soul is like a bowl of water, and our impressions are like
the ray of light falling upon the water. When the water is
troubled, it appears that the light itself is moved too, but it isn’t.
So, when a person loses their composure it isn’t their skills and
virtues that are troubled, but the spirit in which they exist, and
when that spirit calms down so do those things.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.3.20–22

You messed up a little. Or maybe you messed up a lot.
So? That doesn’t change the philosophy that you know. It’s not
as if your reasoned choice has permanently abandoned you. Rather, it
was you who temporarily abandoned it.
Remember that the tools and aims of our training are unaffected by
the turbulence of the moment. Stop. Regain your composure. It’s waiting
for you.

February 29th
YOU CAN’T ALWAYS (BE) GET(TING) WHAT YOU WANT

“When children stick their hand down a narrow goody jar they
can’t get their full fist out and start crying. Drop a few treats
and you will get it out! Curb your desire—don’t set your heart
on so many things and you will get what you need.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.9.22

“We can have it all” is the mantra of our modern lives. Work,
family, purpose, success, leisure time—we want all of this, at
the same time (right now, to boot).
In Greece, the lecture hall (scholeion) was a leisure center where
students contemplated the higher things (the good, true, and beautiful)
for the purpose of living a better life. It was about prioritization, about
questioning the priorities of the outside world. Today, we’re too busy
getting things, just like kids jamming their hand down a jar of goodies, to
do much of this questioning.
“Don’t set your heart on so many things,” says Epictetus. Focus.
Prioritize. Train your mind to ask: Do I need this thing? What will
happen if I do not get it? Can I make do without it?
The answers to these questions will help you relax, help you cut out
all the needless things that make you busy—too busy to be balanced or
happy.

MARCH
AWARENESS

March 1st
WHERE PHILOSOPHY BEGINS

“An important place to begin in philosophy is this: a clear
perception of one’s own ruling principle.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 1.26.15

Philosophy is intimidating. Where does one start? With books? With
lectures? With the sale of your worldly possessions?
None of these things. Epictetus is saying that one becomes a
philosopher when they begin to exercise their guiding reason and start to
question the emotions and beliefs and even language that others take for
granted. It is thought that an animal has self-awareness when it is able to
fully recognize itself in a mirror. Perhaps we could say that we begin our
journey into philosophy when we become aware of the ability to analyze
our own minds.
Can you start with that step today? When you do, you’ll find that
from it we really come alive, that we live lives—to paraphrase Socrates
—that are actually worth living.

March 2nd
ACCURATE SELF-ASSESSMENT

“Above all, it is necessary for a person to have a true selfestimate, for we commonly think we can do more than we
really can.”
—SENECA, ON TRANQUILITY OF MIND, 5.2

Most people resist the idea of a true self-estimate, probably because
they fear it might mean downgrading some of their beliefs about
who they are and what they’re capable of. As Goethe’s maxim goes, it is
a great failing “to see yourself as more than you are.” How could you
really be considered self-aware if you refuse to consider your
weaknesses?
Don’t fear self-assessment because you’re worried you might have to
admit some things about yourself. The second half of Goethe’s maxim is
important too. He states that it is equally damaging to “value yourself at
less than your true worth.” Is it not equally common to be surprised at
how well we’re able to handle a previously feared scenario? The way
that we’re able to put aside the grief for a loved one and care for others
—though we always thought we’d be wrecked if something were to
happen to our parents or a sibling. The way we’re able to rise to the
occasion in a stressful situation or a life-changing opportunity.
We underestimate our capabilities just as much and just as
dangerously as we overestimate other abilities. Cultivate the ability to
judge yourself accurately and honestly. Look inward to discern what
you’re capable of and what it will take to unlock that potential.

March 3rd
(DIS)INTEGRATION

“These things don’t go together. You must be a unified human
being, either good or bad. You must diligently work either on
your own reasoning or on things out of your control—take
great care with the inside and not what’s outside, which is to
say, stand with the philosopher, or else with the mob!”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.15.13

We’re all complicated people. We have multiple sides to ourselves
—conflicting wants, desires, and fears. The outside world is no
less confusing and contradictory. If we’re not careful, all these forces—
pushing and pulling—will eventually tear us apart. We can’t live as both
Jekyll and Hyde. Not for long, anyway.
We have a choice: to stand with the philosopher and focus
strenuously on the inside, or to behave like a leader of a mob, becoming
whatever the crowd needs at a given moment.
If we do not focus on our internal integration—on self-awareness—
we risk external disintegration.

March 4th
AWARENESS IS FREEDOM

“The person is free who lives as they wish, neither compelled,
nor hindered, nor limited—whose choices aren’t hampered,
whose desires succeed, and who don’t fall into what repels
them. Who wishes to live in deception—tripped up, mistaken,
undisciplined, complaining, in a rut? No one. These are base
people who don’t live as they wish; and so, no base person is
free.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.1.1–3a

It is sad to consider how much time many people spend in the course
of a day doing things they “have” to do—not necessary obligations
like work or family, but the obligations we needlessly accept out of
vanity or ignorance. Consider the actions we take in order to impress
other people or the lengths we’ll go to fulfill urges or sate desires we
don’t even question. In one of his famous letters, Seneca observes how
often powerful people are slaves to their money, to their positions, to
their mistresses, even—as was legal in Rome—to their slaves. “No
slavery is more disgraceful,” he quipped, “than one which is selfimposed.”
We see this slavery all the time—a codependent person who can’t
help but clean up after a dysfunctional friend, a boss who micromanages
employees and sweats every penny. The countless causes, events, and
get-togethers we’re too busy to attend but agree to anyway.
Take an inventory of your obligations from time to time. How many
of these are self-imposed? How many of them are truly necessary? Are
you as free as you think?

March 5th
CUTTING BACK ON THE COSTLY

“So, concerning the things we pursue, and for which we
vigorously exert ourselves, we owe this consideration—either
there is nothing useful in them, or most aren’t useful. Some of
them are superfluous, while others aren’t worth that much. But
we don’t discern this and see them as free, when they cost us
dearly.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 42.6

Of Seneca’s many letters, this is probably one of the most important
—and one of the least understood. He’s making a point that goes
unheard in a society of ever-bigger houses and ever more possessions:
that there’s a hidden cost to all that accumulating. And the sooner we’re
aware of it, the better.
Remember: even what we get for free has a cost, if only in what we
pay to store it—in our garages and in our minds. As you walk past your
possessions today, ask yourself: Do I need this? Is it superfluous? What’s
this actually worth? What is it costing me?
You might be surprised by the answers and how much we’ve been
paying without even knowing it.

March 6th
DON’T TELL YOURSELF STORIES

“In public avoid talking often and excessively about your
accomplishments and dangers, for however much you enjoy
recounting your dangers, it’s not so pleasant for others to hear
about your affairs.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 33.14

Modern philosopher Nassim Taleb has warned of the “narrative
fallacy”—the tendency to assemble unrelated events of the past
into stories. These stories, however gratifying to create, are inherently
misleading. They lead to a sense of cohesion and certainty that isn’t real.
If that’s too heady, remember that as Epictetus points out, there is
another reason not to tell stories about your past. It’s boring, annoying,
and self-absorbed. It might make you feel good to dominate the
conversation and make it all about you, but how do you think it is for
everyone else? Do you think people are really enjoying the highlights of
your high school football days? Is this really the time for another
exaggerated tale of your sexual prowess?
Try your best not to create this fantasy bubble—live in what’s real.
Listen and connect with people, don’t perform for them.

March 7th
DON’T TRUST THE SENSES

“Heraclitus called self-deception an awful disease and eyesight a
lying sense.”
—DIOGENES LAERTIUS, LIVES OF THE EMINENT PHILOSOPHERS, 9.7

Self-awareness is the ability to objectively evaluate the self. It’s the
ability to question our own instincts, patterns, and assumptions.
Oiêsis, self-deception or arrogant and unchallenged opinion, requires that
we hold all our opinions up to hard scrutiny; even our eyes deceive us.
On the one hand, that’s alarming. I can’t even trust my own senses?!
Sure, you could think about it that way. Or you could take it another
way: because our senses are often wrong, our emotions overly alarmed,
our projections overly optimistic, we’re better off not rushing into
conclusions about anything. We can take a beat with everything we do
and become aware of everything that’s going on so we can make the
right decision.

March 8th
DON’T UNINTENTIONALLY HAND OVER YOUR FREEDOM

“If a person gave away your body to some passerby, you’d be
furious. Yet you hand over your mind to anyone who comes
along, so they may abuse you, leaving it disturbed and troubled
—have you no shame in that?”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 28

Instinctively, we protect our physical selves. We don’t let people touch
us, push us around, control where we go. But when it comes to the
mind, we’re less disciplined. We hand it over willingly to social media,
to television, to what other people are doing, thinking, or saying. We sit
down to work and the next thing you know, we’re browsing the Internet.
We sit down with our families, but within minutes we have our phones
out. We sit down peacefully in a park, but instead of looking inward,
we’re judging people as they pass by.
We don’t even know that we’re doing this. We don’t realize how
much waste is in it, how inefficient and distracted it makes us. And
what’s worse—no one is making this happen. It’s totally self-inflicted.
To the Stoics, this is an abomination. They know that the world can
control our bodies—we can be thrown in jail or be tossed about by the
weather. But the mind? That’s ours. We must protect it. Maintain control
over your mind and perceptions, they’d say. It’s your most prized
possession.

March 9th
FIND THE RIGHT SCENE

“Above all, keep a close watch on this—that you are never so
tied to your former acquaintances and friends that you are
pulled down to their level. If you don’t, you’ll be ruined. . . .
You must choose whether to be loved by these friends and
remain the same person, or to become a better person at the
cost of those friends . . . if you try to have it both ways you will
neither make progress nor keep what you once had.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.2.1; 4–5

“From good people you’ll learn good, but if you mingle with
the bad you’ll destroy such soul as you had.”
—MUSONIUS RUFUS, QUOTING THEOGNIS OF MEGARA, LECTURES, 11.53.21–22

Jim Rohn’s widely quoted line is: “You are the average of the five
people you spend the most time with.” James Altucher advises young
writers and entrepreneurs to find their “scene”—a group of peers who
push them to be better. Your father might have given you a warning
when he saw you spending time with some bad kids: “Remember, you
become like your friends.” One of Goethe’s maxims captures it better:
“Tell me with whom you consort and I will tell you who you are.”
Consciously consider whom you allow into your life—not like some
snobby elitist but like someone who is trying to cultivate the best life
possible. Ask yourself about the people you meet and spend time with:
Are they making me better? Do they encourage me to push forward and
hold me accountable? Or do they drag me down to their level? Now,
with this in mind, ask the most important question: Should I spend more
or less time with these folks?
The second part of Goethe’s quote tells us the stakes of this choice:
“If I know how you spend your time,” he said, “then I know what might
become of you.”

March 10th
FIND YOURSELF A CATO

“We can remove most sins if we have a witness standing by as
we are about to go wrong. The soul should have someone it can
respect, by whose example it can make its inner sanctum more
inviolable. Happy is the person who can improve others, not
only when present, but even when in their thoughts!”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 11.9

Cato the Younger, a Roman politician best known for his selfdiscipline and for his heroic defense of the Republic against Julius
Caesar, appears constantly throughout Stoic literature—which is
interesting because he didn’t write anything down. He taught no classes.
He gave no interviews. His bold and brave example is what made him
such a commonly cited and quoted philosopher.
Seneca tells us that we should each have our own Cato—a great and
noble person we can allow into our minds and use to guide our actions,
even when they’re not physically present. The economist Adam Smith
had a similar concept, which he called the indifferent spectator. It doesn’t
have to be an actual person, just someone who, like Seneca said, can
stand witness to our behavior. Someone who can quietly admonish us if
we are considering doing something lazy, dishonest, or selfish.
And if we do it right, and live our lives in such a way, perhaps we can
serve as someone else’s Cato or indifferent spectator when they need it.

March 11th
LIVING WITHOUT RESTRICTION

“The unrestricted person, who has in hand what they will in all
events, is free. But anyone who can be restricted, coerced, or
pushed into something against what they will is a slave.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.1.128b–129a

Take a look at some of the most powerful, rich, and famous people in
the world. Ignore the trappings of their success and what they’re
able to buy. Look instead at what they’re forced to trade in return—look
at what success has cost them.
Mostly? Freedom. Their work demands they wear a suit. Their
success depends on attending certain parties, kissing up to people they
don’t like. It will require—inevitably—realizing they are unable to say
what they actually think. Worse, it demands that they become a different
type of person or do bad things.
Sure, it might pay well—but they haven’t truly examined the
transaction. As Seneca put it, “Slavery resides under marble and gold.”
Too many successful people are prisoners in jails of their own making. Is
that what you want? Is that what you’re working hard toward? Let’s hope
not.

March 12th
SEEING THINGS AS THE PERSON AT FAULT DOES

“Whenever someone has done wrong by you, immediately
consider what notion of good or evil they had in doing it. For
when you see that, you’ll feel compassion, instead of
astonishment or rage. For you may yourself have the same
notions of good and evil, or similar ones, in which case you’ll
make an allowance for what they’ve done. But if you no longer
hold the same notions, you’ll be more readily gracious for their
error.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 7.26

Socrates, perhaps the wisest person to ever live, used to say that
“nobody does wrong willingly.” Meaning that no one is wrong on
purpose either. Nobody thinks they’re wrong, even when they are. They
think they’re right, they’re just mistaken. Otherwise, they wouldn’t think
it anymore!
Could it be that the slights you’ve experienced or the harm that others
have done to you was not inflicted intentionally? What if they simply
thought they were doing the right thing—for them, even for you? It’s like
the memorial for Confederate soldiers at Arlington (obviously a cause
that was wrongly fought for by people doing wrong), which states, in
part, that the Confederate soldiers served “in simple obedience to duty,
as they understood it.” Again—they understood wrongly, but it was their
genuine understanding, just as Lincoln was genuine when he ended his
famous Cooper Union speech by saying, “Let us, to the end, dare to do
our duty as we understand it.”
How much more tolerant and understanding would you be today if
you could see the actions of other people as attempts to do the right
thing? Whether you agree or not, how radically would this lens change
your perspective on otherwise offensive or belligerent actions?

March 13th
ONE DAY IT WILL ALL MAKE SENSE

“Whenever you find yourself blaming providence, turn it around
in your mind and you will see that what has happened is in
keeping with reason.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.17.1

Part of the reason we fight against the things that happen is that we’re
so focused on our plan that we forget that there might be a bigger
plan we don’t know about. Is it not the case that plenty of times
something we thought was a disaster turned out to be, with the passage
of time, a lucky break? We also forget that we’re not the only people
who matter and that our loss might be someone else’s gain.
This sense of being wronged is a simple awareness problem. We need
to remember that all things are guided by reason—but that it is a vast and
universal reason that we cannot always see. That the surprise hurricane
was the result of a butterfly flapping its wings a hemisphere away or that
misfortune we have experienced is simply the prelude to a pleasant and
enviable future.

March 14th
SELF-DECEPTION IS OUR ENEMY

“Zeno would also say that nothing is more hostile to a firm grasp
on knowledge than self-deception.”
—DIOGENES LAERTIUS, LIVES OF THE EMINENT PHILOSOPHERS, 7.23

Self-deception, delusions of grandeur—these aren’t just annoying
personality traits. Ego is more than just off-putting and obnoxious.
Instead, it’s the sworn enemy of our ability to learn and grow.
As Epictetus put it, “It is impossible for a person to begin to learn
what he thinks he already knows.” Today, we will be unable to improve,
unable to learn, unable to earn the respect of others if we think we’re
already perfect, a genius admired far and wide. In this sense, ego and
self-deception are the enemies of the things we wish to have because we
delude ourselves into believing that we already possess them.
So we must meet ego with the hostility and contempt that it
insidiously deploys against us—to keep it away, if only for twenty-four
hours at a time.

March 15th
THE PRESENT IS ALL WE POSSESS

“Were you to live three thousand years, or even a countless
multiple of that, keep in mind that no one ever loses a life other
than the one they are living, and no one ever lives a life other
than the one they are losing. The longest and the shortest life,
then, amount to the same, for the present moment lasts the
same for all and is all anyone possesses. No one can lose either
the past or the future, for how can someone be deprived of
what’s not theirs?”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 2.14

Today, notice how often you look for more. That is, wanting the past
to be more than what it was (different, better, still here, etc.) or
wanting the future to unfold exactly as you expect (with hardly a thought
as to how that might affect other people).
When you do this, you’re neglecting the present moment. Talk about
ungrateful! There’s a saying—attributed to Bil Keane, the cartoonist—
worth remembering: “Yesterday’s the past, tomorrow’s the future, but
today is a gift. That’s why it’s called the present.” This present is in our
possession—but it has an expiration date, a quickly approaching one. If
you enjoy all of it, it will be enough. It can last a whole lifetime.

March 16th
THAT SACRED PART OF YOU

“Hold sacred your capacity for understanding. For in it is all, that
our ruling principle won’t allow anything to enter that is either
inconsistent with nature or with the constitution of a logical
creature. It’s what demands due diligence, care for others, and
obedience to God.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 3.9

The fact that you can think, the fact that you can read this book, the
fact that you are able to reason in and out of situations—all of this is
what gives you the ability to improve your circumstances and become
better. It’s important to appreciate this ability, because it’s a genuine
ability. Not everyone is so lucky.
Seriously—what you take for granted, others wouldn’t even think to
dream of.
Take a little time today to remember that you’re blessed with the
capacity to use logic and reason to navigate situations and circumstances.
This gives you unthinkable power to alter your circumstances and the
circumstances of others. And remember that with power comes
responsibility.

March 17th
THE BEAUTY OF CHOICE

“You are not your body and hair-style, but your capacity for
choosing well. If your choices are beautiful, so too will you
be.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.1.39b–40a

It’s that line in the movie Fight Club: “You are not your job, you’re not
how much money you have in the bank. You are not the car you drive.
You’re not the contents of your wallet.” Obviously our friend Epictetus
never saw that movie or read the book—but apparently the consumerism
of the 1990s existed in ancient Rome too.
It’s easy to confuse the image we present to the world for who we
actually are, especially when media messaging deliberately blurs that
distinction.
You might look beautiful today, but if that was the result of vain
obsession in the mirror this morning, the Stoics would ask, are you
actually beautiful? A body built from hard work is admirable. A body
built to impress gym rats is not.
That’s what the Stoics urge us to consider. Not how things appear, but
what effort, activity, and choices they are a result of.

March 18th
IMPOSSIBLE WITHOUT YOUR CONSENT

“Today I escaped from the crush of circumstances, or better put,
I threw them out, for the crush wasn’t from outside me but in
my own assumptions.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 9.13

On tough days we might say, “My work is overwhelming,” or “My
boss is really frustrating.” If only we could understand that this is
impossible. Someone can’t frustrate you, work can’t overwhelm you—
these are external objects, and they have no access to your mind. Those
emotions you feel, as real as they are, come from the inside, not the
outside.
The Stoics use the word hypolêpsis, which means “taking up”—of
perceptions, thoughts, and judgments by our mind. What we assume,
what we willingly generate in our mind, that’s on us. We can’t blame
other people for making us feel stressed or frustrated any more than we
can blame them for our jealousy. The cause is within us. They’re just the
target.

March 19th
TIMELESS WISDOM

“For there are two rules to keep at the ready—that there is
nothing good or bad outside my own reasoned choice, and that
we shouldn’t try to lead events but to follow them.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.10.18

In the mid-twentieth century, there was an Indian Jesuit priest named
Anthony de Mello. Born in Bombay when it was still under British
control, de Mello was an amalgam of many different cultures and
perspectives: East, West; he even trained as a psychotherapist. It’s
interesting when one sees timeless wisdom develop across schools,
across epochs and ideas. Here is a quote from de Mello’s book, The Way
to Love, that sounds almost exactly like Epictetus:
“The cause of my irritation is not in this person but in me.”
Remember, each individual has a choice. You are always the one in
control. The cause of irritation—or our notion that something is bad—
that comes from us, from our labels or our expectations. Just as easily,
we can change those labels; we can change our entitlement and decide to
accept and love what’s happening around us. And this wisdom has been
repeated and independently discovered in every century and every
country since time began.

March 20th
READY AND AT HOME

“I may wish to be free from torture, but if the time comes for me
to endure it, I’ll wish to bear it courageously with bravery and
honor. Wouldn’t I prefer not to fall into war? But if war does
befall me, I’ll wish to carry nobly the wounds, starvation, and
other necessities of war. Neither am I so crazy as to desire
illness, but if I must suffer illness, I’ll wish to do nothing rash
or dishonorable. The point is not to wish for these adversities,
but for the virtue that makes adversities bearable.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 67.4

President James Garfield was a great man—raised in humble
circumstances, self-educated, and eventually a Civil War hero—
whose presidency was cut short by an assassin’s bullet. In his brief time
in office, he faced a bitterly divided country as well as a bitterly and
internally divided Republican Party. During one fight, which challenged
the very authority of his office, he stood firm, telling an adviser: “Of
course I deprecate war, but if it is brought to my door the bringer will
find me at home.”
That’s what Seneca is saying here. We’d be crazy to want to face
difficulty in life. But we’d be equally crazy to pretend that it isn’t going
to happen. Which is why when it knocks on our door—as it very well
may this morning—let’s make sure we’re prepared to answer. Not the
way we are when a surprise visitor comes late at night, but the way we
are when we’re waiting for an important guest: dressed, in the right head
space, ready to go.

March 21st
THE BEST RETREAT IS IN HERE, NOT OUT THERE

“People seek retreats for themselves in the country, by the sea, or
in the mountains. You are very much in the habit of yearning
for those same things. But this is entirely the trait of a base
person, when you can, at any moment, find such a retreat in
yourself. For nowhere can you find a more peaceful and less
busy retreat than in your own soul—especially if on close
inspection it is filled with ease, which I say is nothing more
than being well-ordered. Treat yourself often to this retreat and
be renewed.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 4.3.1

Do you have a vacation coming up? Are you looking forward to the
weekend so you can have some peace and quiet? Maybe, you think,
after things settle down or after I get this over with. But how often has
that ever actually worked?
The Zen meditation teacher Jon Kabat-Zinn coined a famous
expression: “Wherever you go, there you are.” We can find a retreat at
any time by looking inward. We can sit with our eyes closed and feel our
breath go in and out. We can turn on some music and tune out the world.
We can turn off technology or shut off those rampant thoughts in our
head. That will provide us peace. Nothing else.

March 22nd
THE SIGN OF TRUE EDUCATION

“What is it then to be properly educated? It is learning to apply
our natural preconceptions to the right things according to
Nature, and beyond that to separate the things that lie within
our power from those that don’t.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 1.22.9–10a

A degree on a wall means you’re educated as much as shoes on your
feet mean you’re walking. It’s a start, but hardly sufficient.
Otherwise, how could so many “educated” people make unreasonable
decisions? Or miss so many obvious things? Partly it’s because they
forget that they ought to focus only on that which lies within their power
to control. A surviving fragment from the philosopher Heraclitus
expresses that reality:
“Many who have learned
from Hesiod the countless names
of gods and monsters
never understand
that night and day are one.”
Just as you can walk plenty well without shoes, you don’t need to
step into a classroom to understand the basic, fundamental reality of
nature and of our proper role in it. Begin with awareness and reflection.
Not just once, but every single second of every single day.

March 23rd
THE STRAITJACKETED SOUL

“The diseases of the rational soul are long-standing and hardened
vices, such as greed and ambition—they have put the soul in a
straitjacket and have begun to be permanent evils inside it. To
put it briefly, this sickness is an unrelenting distortion of
judgment, so things that are only mildly desirable are
vigorously sought after.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 75.11

In the financial disaster of the late 2000s, hundreds of smart, rational
people lost trillions of dollars’ worth of wealth. How could such smart
people have been so foolish? These people knew the system, knew how
the markets were supposed to work, and had managed billions, if not
trillions, of dollars. And yet, almost to a person, they were wrong—and
wrong to the tune of global market havoc.
It’s not hard to look at that situation and understand that greed was
some part of the problem. Greed was what led people to create complex
markets that no one understood in the hope of making a quick buck.
Greed caused other people to make trades on strange pools of debt.
Greed prevented anyone from calling out this situation for what it was—
a house of cards just waiting for the slightest breeze to knock it all down.
It doesn’t do you much good to criticize those folks after the fact. It’s
better to look at how greed and vices might be having a similar effect in
your own life. What lapses in judgment might your vices be causing
you? What “sicknesses” might you have?
And how can your rational mind step in and regulate them?

March 24th
THERE IS PHILOSOPHY IN EVERYTHING

“Eat like a human being, drink like a human being, dress up,
marry, have children, get politically active—suffer abuse, bear
with a headstrong brother, father, son, neighbor, or companion.
Show us these things so we can see that you truly have learned
from the philosophers.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.21.5–6

Plutarch, a Roman biographer as well as an admirer of the Stoics,
didn’t begin his study of the greats of Roman literature until late in
life. But, as he recounts in his biography of Demosthenes, he was
surprised at how quickly it all came to him. He wrote, “It wasn’t so much
that the words brought me into a full understanding of events, as that,
somehow, I had a personal experience of the events that allowed me to
follow closely the meaning of the words.”
This is what Epictetus means about the study of philosophy. Study,
yes, but go live your life as well. It’s the only way that you’ll actually
understand what any of it means. And more important, it’s only from
your actions and choices over time that it will be possible to see whether
you took any of the teachings to heart.
Be aware of that today when you’re going to work, going on a date,
deciding whom to vote for, calling your parents in the evening, waving
to your neighbor as you walk to your door, tipping the delivery man,
saying goodnight to someone you love. All of that is philosophy. All of it
is experience that brings meaning to the words.

March 25th
WEALTH AND FREEDOM ARE FREE

“. . . freedom isn’t secured by filling up on your heart’s desire
but by removing your desire.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 4.1.175

There are two ways to be wealthy—to get everything you want or to
want everything you have. Which is easier right here and right now?
The same goes for freedom. If you chafe and fight and struggle for more,
you will never be free. If you could find and focus on the pockets of
freedom you already have? Well, then you’d be free right here, right
now.

March 26th
WHAT RULES YOUR RULING REASON?

“How does your ruling reason manage itself? For in that is the
key to everything. Whatever else remains, be it in the power of
your choice or not, is but a corpse and smoke.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 12.33

The Roman satirist Juvenal is famous for this question: Quis custodiet
ipsos custodes? (Who watches the watchmen?) In a way, this is
what Marcus is asking himself—and what you might ask yourself
throughout the day. What influences the ruling reason that guides your
life?
This means an exploration of subjects like evolutionary biology,
psychology, neurology, and even the subconscious. Because these deeper
forces shape even the most disciplined, rational minds. You can be the
most patient person in the world, but if science shows we make poor
decisions on an empty stomach—what good is all that patience?
So don’t stop at Stoicism, but explore the forces that drive and make
Stoicism possible. Learn what underpins this philosophy you’re
studying, how the body and mind tick. Understand not only your ruling
reason—the watchmen—but whoever and whatever rules that too.

March 27th
PAY WHAT THINGS ARE WORTH

“Diogenes of Sinope said we sell things of great value for things
of very little, and vice versa.”
—DIOGENES LAERTIUS, LIVES OF THE EMINENT PHILOSOPHERS, 6.2.35b

You can buy a Plume Blanche diamond-encrusted sofa for close to
two hundred thousand dollars. It’s also possible to hire one person
to kill another person for five hundred dollars. Remember that next time
you hear someone ramble on about how the market decides what things
are worth. The market might be rational . . . but the people who comprise
it are not.
Diogenes, who founded the Cynic school, emphasized the true worth
(axia) of things, a theme that persisted in Stoicism and was strongly
reflected in both Epictetus and Marcus. It’s easy to lose track. When the
people around you dump a fortune into trinkets they can’t take with them
when they die, it might seem like a good investment for you to make too.
But of course it isn’t. The good things in life cost what they cost. The
unnecessary things are not worth it at any price. The key is being aware
of the difference.

March 28th
COWARDICE AS A DESIGN PROBLEM

“Life without a design is erratic. As soon as one is in place,
principles become necessary. I think you’ll concede that
nothing is more shameful than uncertain and wavering conduct,
and beating a cowardly retreat. This will happen in all our
affairs unless we remove the faults that seize and detain our
spirits, preventing them from pushing forward and making an
all-out effort.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 95.46

The opposing team comes out strong, establishes an early lead, and
you never had time to recover. You walk into a business meeting,
are caught off guard, and the whole thing goes poorly. A delicate
conversation escalates into a shouting match. You switched majors
halfway through college and had to start your coursework over and
graduate late. Sound familiar?
It’s the chaos that ensues from not having a plan. Not because plans
are perfect, but because people without plans—like a line of infantrymen
without a strong leader—are much more likely to get overwhelmed and
fall apart. The Super Bowl–winning coach Bill Walsh used to avoid this
risk by scripting the beginning of his games. “If you want to sleep at
night before the game,” he said in a lecture on game planning, “have
your first 25 plays established in your own mind the night before that.
You can walk into the stadium and you can start the game without that
stress factor.” You’ll also be able to ignore a couple of early points or a
surprise from your opponent. It’s irrelevant to you—you already have
your marching orders.
Don’t try to make it up on the fly. Have a plan.

March 29th
WHY DO YOU NEED TO IMPRESS THESE PEOPLE AGAIN?

“If you should ever turn your will to things outside your control
in order to impress someone, be sure that you have wrecked
your whole purpose in life. Be content, then, to be a
philosopher in all that you do, and if you wish also to be seen
as one, show yourself first that you are and you will succeed.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 23

Is there anything sadder than the immense lengths we’ll go to impress
someone? The things we’ll do to earn someone’s approval can seem,
when examined in retrospect, like the result of some temporary form of
insanity. Suddenly we’re wearing uncomfortable, ridiculous clothes
we’ve been told are cool, eating differently, talking differently, eagerly
waiting for a call or text. If we did these things because we liked it, that
would be one thing. But that’s not what it is. It’s just a means to an end—
to get someone to give us the nod.
The irony, as Marcus Aurelius points out repeatedly, is that the
people whose opinion we covet are not all that great. They’re flawed—
they’re distracted and wowed by all sorts of silly things themselves. We
know this and yet we don’t want to think about it. To quote Fight Club
again, “We buy things we don’t need, to impress people we don’t like.”
Doesn’t that sound pretty ridiculous? But more than that, isn’t it
about as far as possible as you can get from the serenity and security that
philosophy can provide?

March 30th
REASON IN ALL THINGS

“Hurry to your own ruling reason, to the reason of the Whole,
and to your neighbor’s. To your own mind to make it just; to
the mind of the Whole to remember your place in it; and to
your neighbor’s mind to learn whether it’s ignorant or of sound
knowledge—while recognizing it’s like yours.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 9.22

If our lives are not ruled by reason, what are they ruled by? Impulse?
Whim? Mimicry? Unthinking habit? As we examine our past
behavior, it’s sad how often we find this to be the case—that we were not
acting consciously or deliberately but instead by forces we did not bother
to evaluate. It also happens that these are the instances that we’re mostly
likely to regret.

March 31st
YOU’RE A PRODUCT OF YOUR TRAINING

“Chasing what can’t be done is madness. But the base person is
unable to do anything else.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.17

A dog that’s allowed to chase cars will chase cars. A child who is never
given any boundaries will become spoiled. An investor without
discipline is not an investor—he’s a gambler. A mind that isn’t in control
of itself, that doesn’t understand its power to regulate itself, will be
jerked around by external events and unquestioned impulses.
That can’t be how you’d like tomorrow to go. So you must be aware
of that. You must put in place training and habits now to replace
ignorance and ill discipline. Only then will you begin to behave and act
differently. Only then will you stop seeking the impossible, the
shortsighted, and the unnecessary.

APRIL
UNBIASED THOUGHT

April 1st
THE COLOR OF YOUR THOUGHTS

“Your mind will take the shape of what you frequently hold in
thought, for the human spirit is colored by such impressions.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 5.16

If you bend your body into a sitting position every day for a long
enough period of time, the curvature of your spine changes. A doctor
can tell from a radiograph (or an autopsy) whether someone sat at a desk
for a living. If you shove your feet into tiny, narrow dress shoes each
day, your feet begin to take on that form as well.
The same is true for our mind. If you hold a perpetually negative
outlook, soon enough everything you encounter will seem negative.
Close it off and you’ll become closed-minded. Color it with the wrong
thoughts and your life will be dyed the same.

April 2nd
BE WARY OF WHAT YOU LET IN

“Drama, combat, terror, numbness, and subservience—every day
these things wipe out your sacred principles, whenever your
mind entertains them uncritically or lets them slip in.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 10.9

How much harder is it to do the right thing when you’re surrounded
by people with low standards? How much harder is it to be positive
and empathetic inside the negativity bubble of television chatter? How
much harder is it to focus on your own issues when you’re distracted
with other people’s drama and conflict?
We’ll inevitably be exposed to these influences at some point, no
matter how much we try to avoid them. But when we are, there is
nothing that says we have to allow those influences to penetrate our
minds. We have the ability to put our guard up and decide what we
actually allow in. Uninvited guests might arrive at your home, but you
don’t have to ask them to stay for dinner. You don’t have to let them into
your mind.

April 3rd
DECEIVED AND DIVIDED

“Circumstances are what deceive us—you must be discerning in
them. We embrace evil before good. We desire the opposite of
what we once desired. Our prayers are at war with our prayers,
our plans with our plans.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 45.6

A woman says she wants to meet a nice guy and get married—yet she
spends all her time around jerks. A man says that he wishes he could find
a great job, but he hasn’t actually bothered to do the looking. Business
executives try to pursue two different strategies at the same time—
straddling it’s called—and they are shocked when they succeed at
neither.
All of these people, just as is often true for us too, are deceived and
divided. One hand is working against the other. As Martin Luther King
Jr. once put it, “There is something of a civil war going on within all of
our lives,” a war inside each individual between the good parts of their
soul and the bad.
The Stoics say that that war is usually a result of our conflicting
desires, our screwed-up judgments or biased thoughts. We don’t stop and
ask: OK, what do I really want? What am I actually after here? If we
did, we’d notice the contradictory and inconsistent wishes that we have.
And then we’d stop working against ourselves.

April 4th
DON’T LET THIS GO TO YOUR HEAD

“Make sure you’re not made ‘Emperor,’ avoid that imperial
stain. It can happen to you, so keep yourself simple, good, pure,
saintly, plain, a friend of justice, god-fearing, gracious,
affectionate, and strong for your proper work. Fight to remain
the person that philosophy wished to make you. Revere the
gods, and look after each other. Life is short—the fruit of this
life is a good character and acts for the common good.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 6.30

It is difficult even to conceive of what life must have been like for
Marcus Aurelius—he wasn’t born emperor, nor did he obtain the
position deliberately. It was simply thrust upon him. Nevertheless, he
was suddenly the richest man in the world, head of the most powerful
army on earth, ruling over the largest empire in history, considered a god
among men.
It’s no wonder he wrote little messages like this one to remind
himself not to spin off the planet. Without them, he might have lost his
sense of what was important—falling prey to the lies from all the people
who needed things from him. And here we are, whatever we happen to
be doing, at risk of spinning off ourselves.
When we experience success, we must make sure that it doesn’t
change us—that we continue to maintain our character despite the
temptation not to. Reason must lead the way no matter what good
fortune comes along.

April 5th
TRUST, BUT VERIFY

“First off, don’t let the force of the impression carry you away.
Say to it, ‘hold up a bit and let me see who you are and where
you are from—let me put you to the test’ . . .”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.18.24

One of the wonders of your mind is the quickness with which it can
comprehend and categorize things. As Malcolm Gladwell wrote in
Blink, we are constantly making split-second decisions based on years of
experience and knowledge as well as using the same skill to confirm
prejudices, stereotypes, and assumptions. Clearly, the former thinking is
a source of strength, whereas the latter is a great weakness.
We lose very little by taking a beat to consider our own thoughts. Is
this really so bad? What do I really know about this person? Why do I
have such strong feelings here? Is anxiety really adding much to the
situation? What’s so special about __________?
By asking these questions—by putting our impressions to the test as
Epictetus recommends—we’re less likely to be carried away by them or
make a move on a mistaken or biased one. We’re still free to use our
instincts, but we should always, as the Russian proverb says, “trust, but
verify.”

April 6th
PREPARE YOURSELF FOR NEGATIVITY

“When you first rise in the morning tell yourself: I will
encounter busybodies, ingrates, egomaniacs, liars, the jealous
and cranks. They are all stricken with these afflictions because
they don’t know the difference between good and evil. Because
I have understood the beauty of good and the ugliness of evil, I
know that these wrong-doers are still akin to me . . . and that
none can do me harm, or implicate me in ugliness—nor can I
be angry at my relatives or hate them. For we are made for
cooperation.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 2.1

You can be certain as clockwork that at some point today you’re
going to interact with someone who seems like a jerk (as we all
have been). The question is: Are you going to be ready for it?
This exercise calls to mind a joke from the eighteenth-century writer
and witticist Nicolas Chamfort, who remarked that if you “swallow a
toad every morning,” you’ll be fortified against anything else disgusting
that might happen the rest of the day. Might it not be better to understand
up front—right when you wake up—that other people often behave in
selfish or ignorant ways (the toad) than it is to nibble it throughout the
day?
But there is a second part to this, just as there is a second half of
Marcus’s quote: “No one can implicate me in ugliness—nor can I be
angry at my relative or hate him.” The point of this preparation is not to
write off everyone in advance. It’s that, maybe, because you’ve prepared
for it, you’ll be able to act with patience, forgiveness, and understanding.

April 7th
EXPECT TO CHANGE YOUR OPINIONS

“There are two things that must be rooted out in human beings—
arrogant opinion and mistrust. Arrogant opinion expects that
there is nothing further needed, and mistrust assumes that under
the torrent of circumstance there can be no happiness.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 3.14.8

How often do we begin some project certain we know exactly how it
will go? How often do we meet people and think we know exactly
who and what they are? And how often are these assumptions proved to
be completely and utterly wrong?
This is why we must fight our biases and preconceptions: because
they are a liability. Ask yourself: What haven’t I considered? Why is this
thing the way it is? Am I part of the problem here or the solution? Could
I be wrong here? Be doubly careful to honor what you do not know, and
then set that against the knowledge you actually have.
Remember, if there is one core teaching at the heart of this
philosophy, it’s that we’re not as smart and as wise as we’d like to think
we are. If we ever do want to become wise, it comes from the
questioning and from humility—not, as many would like to think, from
certainty, mistrust, and arrogance.

April 8th
THE COST OF ACCEPTING COUNTERFEITS

“When it comes to money, where we feel our clear interest, we
have an entire art where the tester uses many means to discover
the worth . . . just as we give great attention to judging things
that might steer us badly. But when it comes to our own ruling
principle, we yawn and doze off, accepting any appearance that
flashes by without counting the cost.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 1.20.8; 11

When coins were much more rudimentary, people had to spend a lot
of time testing them to confirm the currency they’d just received
was genuine. The Greek word dokimazein means “to assay” or check the
quality of a mineral ore. Merchants were often skilled enough that they
could test coinage by throwing it against a hard surface and listen to the
note it rang. Even today, though, if someone were to hand you a
hundred-dollar bill, you might rub it between your fingers or hold it up to
the light, just to confirm it wasn’t a fake.
All this for an imaginary currency, an invention of society. The point
of this metaphor is to highlight how much effort we put into making sure
money is real, whereas we accept potentially life-changing thoughts or
assumptions without so much as a question. One ironic assumption along
these lines: that having a lot of money makes you wealthy. Or that
because a lot of people believe something, it must be true.
Really, we should be testing these notions as vigilantly as a money
changer. For, as Epictetus reminds us, “the first and greatest task of the
philosopher is to test and separate appearances, and to act on nothing that
is untested.”

April 9th
TEST YOUR IMPRESSIONS

“From the very beginning, make it your practice to say to every
harsh impression, ‘you are an impression and not at all what
you appear to be.’ Next, examine and test it by the rules you
possess, the first and greatest of which is this—whether it
belongs to the things in our control or not in our control, and if
the latter, be prepared to respond, ‘It is nothing to me.’”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 1.5

In an overly quantified world of policies and processes, some are
swinging back in the other direction. Bold leaders will “trust their
gut.” A spiritual guru will say that it’s important to “let your body guide
you.” A friend trying to help us with a difficult decision might ask,
“What feels right here?”
These approaches to decision making contradict voluminous case
studies in which people’s instincts have led them right into trouble. Our
senses are wrong all the time! As animals subjected to the slow force of
evolution, we have developed all sorts of heuristics, biases, and
emotional responses that might have worked well on the savannah but
are totally counterproductive in today’s world.
Part of Stoicism is cultivating the awareness that allows you to step
back and analyze your own senses, question their accuracy, and proceed
only with the positive and constructive ones. Sure, it’s tempting to throw
discipline and order to the wind and go with what feels right—but if our
many youthful regrets are any indication, what feels right right now
doesn’t always stand up well over time. Hold your senses suspect. Again,
trust, but always verify.

April 10th
JUDGMENTS CAUSE DISTURBANCE

“It isn’t events themselves that disturb people, but only their
judgments about them.”
—EPICTETUS, ENCHIRIDION, 5

The samurai swordsman Musashi made a distinction between our
“perceiving eye” and our “observing eye.” The observing eye sees
what is. The perceiving eye sees what things supposedly mean. Which
one do you think causes us the most anguish?
An event is inanimate. It’s objective. It simply is what it is. That’s
what our observing eye sees.
This will ruin me. How could this have happened? Ugh! It’s so-andso’s fault. That’s our perceiving eye at work. Bringing disturbance with it
and then blaming it on the event.

April 11th
IF YOU WANT TO LEARN, BE HUMBLE

“Throw out your conceited opinions, for it is impossible for a
person to begin to learn what he thinks he already knows.”
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, 2.17.1

Of all the Stoics, Epictetus is the closest one to a true teacher. He had
a school. He hosted classes. In fact, his wisdom is passed down to
us through a student who took really good lecture notes. One of the
things that frustrated Epictetus about philosophy students—and has
frustrated all college professors since time began—is how students claim
to want to be taught but really secretly believe they already know
everything.
The reality is that we’re all guilty of thinking we know it all, and
we’d all learn more if we could set that attitude aside. As smart or
successful as we may be, there is always someone who is smarter, more
successful, and wiser than us. Emerson put it well: “Every man I meet is
my master in some point, and in that I learn of him.”
If you want to learn, if you want to improve your life, seeking out
teachers, philosophers, and great books is a good start. But this approach
will only be effective if you’re humble and ready to let go of opinions
you already have.

April 12th
REJECT TANTALIZING GIFTS

“Atreus: Who would reject the flood of fortune’s gifts?

Thyestes: Anyone who has experienced how easily they flow
back.”
—SENECA, THYESTES, 536

Thyestes is one of Seneca’s darkest and most disturbing plays. Even
two thousand years later it remains a classic of the revenge genre.
Without spoiling it, the quote above comes from the scene in which
Atreus is attempting to lure his hated brother Thyestes into a cruel trap
by offering him tempting and generous gifts. At first, Thyestes declines,
to the complete bafflement of his enemy.
We are typically surprised when someone turns down an expensive
gift or a position of honor or success. General William T. Sherman
emphatically rejected offers to run for president of the United States,
saying at one point: “I will not accept if nominated and will not serve if
elected.” If his friend Ulysses S. Grant had made such a “Shermanesque
statement” (as such rejections are now known), Grant certainly would
have preserved his own legacy from the disastrous turn of events it
suffered.
Despite his initial misgivings, Thyestes is ultimately tempted and
persuaded to accept “fortune’s gifts,” . . . which turned out to be a ruse
hiding devastating tragedy. Not every opportunity is fraught with danger,
but the play was intended to remind us that our attraction toward what is
new and shiny can lead us into serious trouble.

April 13th
LESS IS MORE

“Don’t act grudgingly, selfishly, without due diligence, or to be a
contrarian. Don’t overdress your thought in fine language.
Don’t be a person of too many words and too many deeds. . . .
Be cheerful, not wanting outside help or the relief others might
bring. A person needs to stand on their own, not be propped
up.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS, MEDITATIONS, 3.5

In most areas of life, the saying “Less is more” stands true. For
instance, the writers we admire tend to be masters of economy and
brevity. What they leave out is just as important—sometimes more
important—than what they leave in. There is a poem by Philip Levine
titled “He Would Never Use One Word Where None Would Do.” And
from Hamlet, the best of all—the retort from Queen Gertrude after a
long, rhetorical speech from Polonius: “More matter with less art,” she
tells him. Get to the point!
Imagine the emperor of Rome, with his captive audience and
unlimited power, telling himself not to be a person of “too many words
and too many deeds.” Let that be a reminder the next time you feel selfindulgent or a little full of yourself, the next time you feel like
impressing people.

April 14th
BECOMING AN EXPERT IN WHAT MATTERS

“Believe me, it’s better to produce the balance-sheet of your own
life than that of the grain market.”
—SENECA, ON THE BREVITY OF LIFE, 18.3b

The things that some people manage to be experts in: fantasy sports,
celebrity trivia, derivatives and commodities markets, thirteenthcentury hygiene habits of the clergy.
We can get very good at what we’re paid to do, or adept at a hobby
we wish we could be paid to do. Yet our own lives, habits, and
tendencies might be a mystery to us.
Seneca was writing this important reminder to his father-in-law, who,
as it happened, was for a time in charge of Rome’s granary. But then his
position was revoked for political purposes. Who really cares, Seneca
was saying, now you can focus that energy on your inner life.
At the end of your time on this planet, what expertise is going to be
more valuable—your understanding of matters of living and dying, or
your knowledge of the ’87 Bears? Which will help your children more—
your insight into happiness and meaning, or that you followed breaking
political news every day for thirty years?

April 15th
PAY YOUR TAXES

“Nothing will ever befall me that I will receive with gloom or a
bad disposition. I will pay my taxes gladly. Now, all the things
which cause complaint or dread are like the taxes of life—
things from which, my dear Lucilius, you should never hope for
exemption or seek escape.”
—SENECA, MORAL LETTERS, 96.2

As your income taxes come due, you might be like many people—
complaining at what you have to fork over to the government.
Forty percent of everything I make goes to these people? And for what?!
First off, taxes go to a lot of programs and services you almost
certainly take for granted. Second, you think you’re so special? People
have been complaining about their taxes for thousands of years, and now
they’re dead. Get over it. Third, this is a good problem to have. Far better
than, say, making so little there is nothing left to pay the government or
living in an anarchy and having to pay for every basic service in a
struggle against nature.
But more important, income taxes are not the only taxes you pay in
life. They are just the financial form. Everything we do has a toll
attached to it. Waiting around is a tax on traveling. Rumors and gossip
are the taxes that come from acquiring a public persona. Disagreements
and occasional frustration are taxes placed on even the happiest of
relationships. Theft is a tax on abundance and having things that other
people want. Stress and problems are tariffs that come attached to
success. And on and on and on.
There are many forms of taxes in life. You can argue with them, you
can go to great—but ultimately futile—lengths to evade them, or you can
simply pay them and enjoy the fruits of what you get to keep.